THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly
resolved to constitute India into a 1 [SOVEREIGN
SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC] and
to secure to all its citizens:

Preamble.

JUSTICE, social, economic and political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and
worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;
and to promote among them all
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual
and the 2[unity and integrity of the Nation];
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twentysixth day of November, 1949, do HEREBY ADOPT,
ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS
CONSTITUTION.

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 2, for “SOVEREIGN
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC” (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2
Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “unity of the Nation” (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

PART I
THE UNION AND ITS TERRITORY
Name and territory
of the Union.

1. (1) India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union of States.
1

[(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be as
specified in the First Schedule.]
(3) The territory of India shall comprise—
(a) the territories of the States;
2

[(b) the Union territories specified in the First
Schedule; and]
(c) such other territories as may be acquired.
Admission or
establishment of
new States.

2. Parliament may by law admit into the Union, or
establish, new States on such terms and conditions as it
thinks fit.
3

2A. [Sikkim to be associated with the Union.] Rep. by the
Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (w.e.f.
26-4-1975).
Formation of new
States and
alteration of areas,
boundaries or
names of existing
States.

3. Parliament may by law—
(a) form a new State by separation of territory
from any State or by uniting two or more States or
parts of States or by uniting any territory to a part of
any State;
(b) increase the area of any State;
(c) diminish the area of any State;
(d) alter the boundaries of any State;
(e) alter the name of any State:
4

[Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall be
introduced in either House of Parliament except on the
recommendation of the President and unless, where the
proposal contained in the Bill affects the area, boundaries
1

Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 2, for cl. (2).
Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for sub-clause (b).
3
Article 2A was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 2 (w.e.f.
1-3-1975).
4
Subs. by the Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 2, for the proviso.
2

2

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

3

(Part I.—The Union and its territory.—Arts. 3-4.)
or name of any of the States 1***, the Bill has been referred
by the President to the Legislature of that State for
expressing its views thereon within such period as may
be specified in the reference or within such further period
as the President may allow and the period so specified or
allowed has expired.]
2

[Explanation I.—In this article, in clauses (a) to (e),
"State'' includes a Union territory, but in the proviso,
"State'' does not include a Union territory.
Explanation II.—The power conferred on Parliament
by clause (a) includes the power to form a new State or
Union territory by uniting a part of any State or Union
territory to any other State or Union territory.]
4. (1) Any law referred to in article 2 or article 3 shall
contain such provisions for the amendment of the First
Schedule and the Fourth Schedule as may be necessary
to give effect to the provisions of the law and may also
contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential
provisions (including provisions as to representation in
Parliament and in the Legislature or Legislatures of the
State or States affected by such law) as Parliament may
deem necessary.

Laws made under
articles 2 and 3 to
provide for the
amendment of the
First and the
Fourth Schedules
and supplemental,
incidental and
consequential
matters.

(2) No such law as aforesaid shall be deemed to be
an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of
article 368.

1
The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 1966, s. 2.

PART II
CITIZENSHIP
Citizenship at the
commencement of
the Constitution.

5. At the commencement of this Constitution, every
person who has his domicile in the territory of India
and—
(a) who was born in the territory of India; or
(b) either of whose parents was born in the territory
of India; or
(c) who has been ordinarily resident in the territory
of India for not less than five years immediately
preceding such commencement,
shall be a citizen of India.

Rights of
citizenship of
certain persons
who have migrated
to India from
Pakistan.

6. Notwithstanding anything in article 5, a person
who has migrated to the territory of India from the
territory now included in Pakistan shall be deemed to be
a citizen of India at the commencement of this
Constitution if—
(a) he or either of his parents or any of his
grandparents was born in India as defined in the
Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted);
and
(b) (i) in the case where such person has so
migrated before the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he
has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India
since the date of his migration, or
(ii) in the case where such person has so migrated
on or after the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has
been registered as a citizen of India by an officer
appointed in that behalf by the Government of the
Dominion of India on an application made by him
therefor to such officer before the commencement of
this Constitution in the form and manner prescribed
by that Government:
Provided that no person shall be so registered unless
he has been resident in the territory of India for at least
six months immediately preceding the date of his
application.
4

5

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part II.—Citizenship.—Arts. 7—11.)
7. Notwithstanding anything in articles 5 and 6, a
person who has after the first day of March, 1947,
migrated from the territory of India to the territory now
included in Pakistan shall not be deemed to be a citizen
of India:

Rights of
citizenship of
certain migrants to
Pakistan.

Provided that nothing in this article shall apply to a
person who, after having so migrated to the territory now
included in Pakistan, has returned to the territory of India
under a permit for resettlement or permanent return issued
by or under the authority of any law and every such
person shall for the purposes of clause (b) of article 6 be
deemed to have migrated to the territory of India after the
nineteenth day of July, 1948.
8. Notwithstanding anything in article 5, any person
who or either of whose parents or any of whose
grandparents was born in India as defined in the
Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted),
and who is ordinarily residing in any country outside
India as so defined shall be deemed to be a citizen of
India if he has been registered as a citizen of India by the
diplomatic or consular representative of India in the
country where he is for the time being residing on an
application made by him therefor to such diplomatic or
consular representative, whether before or after the
commencement of this Constitution, in the form and
manner prescribed by the Government of the Dominion of
India or the Government of India.

Rights of
citizenship of
certain persons of
Indian origin
residing outside
India.

9. No person shall be a citizen of India by virtue of
article 5, or be deemed to be a citizen of India by virtue
of article 6 or article 8, if he has voluntarily acquired the
citizenship of any foreign State.

Persons voluntarily
acquiring
citizenship of a
foreign State not to
be citizens.

10. Every person who is or is deemed to be a citizen
of India under any of the foregoing provisions of this
Part shall, subject to the provisions of any law that may
be made by Parliament, continue to be such citizen.

Continuance of the
rights of
citizenship.

11. Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part
shall derogate from the power of Parliament to make
any provision with respect to the acquisition and
termination of citizenship and all other matters relating
to citizenship.

Parliament to
regulate the right
of citizenship by
law.

PART III
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
General
Definition.

12. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,
“the State’’ includes the Government and Parliament of
India and the Government and the Legislature of each of
the States and all local or other authorities within the
territory of India or under the control of the Government
of India.

Laws inconsistent
with or in
derogation of the
fundamental rights.

13. (1) All laws in force in the territory of India
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution,
in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this
Part, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.
(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away
or abridges the rights conferred by this Part and any law
made in contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of
the contravention, be void.
(3) In this article, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “law” includes any Ordinance, order, bye-law,
rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having
in the territory of India the force of law;
(b) “laws in force” includes laws passed or made by
a Legislature or other competent authority in the
territory of India before the commencement of this
Constitution and not previously repealed,
notwithstanding that any such law or any part thereof
may not be then in operation either at all or in
particular areas.
1
[(4) Nothing in this article shall apply to any
amendment of this Constitution made under article 368.]

Right to Equality
Equality before
law.

1

14. The State shall not deny to any person equality
before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the
territory of India.

Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 2.

6

7

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Arts. 15-16.)
15. (1) The State shall not discriminate against any
citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place
of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race,
caste, sex, place of birth or any of them, be subject to any
disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to—

Prohibition of
discrimination on
grounds of
religion, race,
caste, sex or place
of birth.

(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and
places of public entertainment; or
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads
and places of public resort maintained wholly or
partly out of State funds or dedicated to the use of
the general public.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from
making any special provision for women and children.
1
[(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29
shall prevent the State from making any special provision
for the advancement of any socially and educationally
backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes.]
2

[(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of
clause (1) of article 19 shall prevent the State from making
any special provision, by law, for the advancement of
any socially and educationally backward classes of
citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to their
admission to educational institutions including private
educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by
the State, other than the minority educational institutions
referred to in clause (1) of article 30.]
16. (1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all
citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment
to any office under the State.

Equality of
opportunity in
matters of public
employment.

(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race,
caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of
them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect
of, any employment or office under the State.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament
from making any law prescribing, in regard to a class or
classes of employment or appointment to an office
1
2

Added by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 2.
Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-1-2006).

8

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Arts. 16—18.)
1

Abolition of
Untouchability.

Abolition of titles.

[under the Government of, or any local or other authority
within, a State or Union territory, any requirement as to
residence within that State or Union territory] prior to
such employment or appointment.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from
making any provision for the reservation of appointments
or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which,
in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented
in the services under the State.
2
[(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State
from making any provision for reservation 3[in matters
of promotion, with consequential seniority, to any class]
or classes of posts in the services under the State in favour
of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which,
in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented
in the services under the State.]
4
[(4B) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State
from considering any unfilled vacancies of a year which
are reserved for being filled up in that year in accordance
with any provision for reservation made under clause (4)
or clause (4A) as a separate class of vacancies to be filled
up in any succeeding year or years and such class of
vacancies shall not be considered together with the
vacancies of the year in which they are being filled up for
determining the ceiling of fifty per cent. reservation on
total number of vacancies of that year.]
(5) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of
any law which provides that the incumbent of an office
in connection with the affairs of any religious or
denominational institution or any member of the
governing body thereof shall be a person professing a
particular religion or belonging to a particular
denomination.
17. “Untouchability” is abolished and its practice in
any form is forbidden. The enforcement of any disability
arising out of “Untouchability” shall be an offence
punishable in accordance with law.
18. (1) No title, not being a military or academic
distinction, shall be conferred by the State.
(2) No citizen of India shall accept any title from any
foreign State.

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for “under
any State specified in the First Schedule or any local or other authority within its territory, any
requirement as to residence within that State”.
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995, s. 2.
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 2, for certain words
(w.e.f. 17-6-1995).
4
Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-first Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9-6-2000).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

9

(Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Arts. 18-19.)
(3) No person who is not a citizen of India shall,
while he holds any office of profit or trust under the
State, accept without the consent of the President any
title from any foreign State.
(4) No person holding any office of profit or trust
under the State shall, without the consent of the President,
accept any present, emolument, or office of any kind
from or under any foreign State.
Right to Freedom
19. (1) All citizens shall have the right—
(a) to freedom of speech and expression;
(b) to assemble peaceably and without arms;
(c) to form associations or unions;
(d) to move freely throughout the territory of India;
(e) to reside and settle in any part of the territory
of India; 1[and]
2
*
*
*
*
*
(g) to practise any profession, or to carry on any
occupation, trade or business.
3
[(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect
the operation of any existing law, or prevent the State
from making any law, in so far as such law imposes
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right
conferred by the said sub-clause in the interests of 4[the
sovereignty and integrity of India,] the security of the
State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order,
decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court,
defamation or incitement to an offence.]
(3) Nothing in sub-clause (b) of the said clause shall
affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it
imposes, or prevent the State from making any law
imposing, in the interests of 4[the sovereignty and integrity
of India or] public order, reasonable restrictions on the
exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause.
(4) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of the said clause shall
affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it
imposes, or prevent the State from making any law
imposing, in the interests of 4 [the sovereignty and
1

Protection of
certain rights
regarding freedom
of speech, etc.

Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
Sub-clause (f) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3
Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 3, for cl. (2) (with retrospective
effect).
4
Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 2.
2

10

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Arts. 19—21.)
integrity of India or] public order or morality, reasonable
restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the
said sub-clause.
(5) Nothing in 1[sub-clauses (d) and (e)] of the said
clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so
far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any
law imposing, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of
any of the rights conferred by the said sub-clauses either
in the interests of the general public or for the protection
of the interests of any Scheduled Tribe.
(6) Nothing in sub-clause (g) of the said clause shall
affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it
imposes, or prevent the State from making any law
imposing, in the interests of the general public, reasonable
restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the
said sub-clause, and, in particular, 2[nothing in the said
sub-clause shall affect the operation of any existing law
in so far as it relates to, or prevent the State from making
any law relating to,—
(i) the professional or technical qualifications
necessary for practising any profession or carrying on
any occupation, trade or business, or
(ii) the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation
owned or controlled by the State, of any trade,
business, industry or service, whether to the
exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or
otherwise].
Protection in
respect of
conviction for
offences.

20. (1) No person shall be convicted of any offence
except for violation of a law in force at the time of the
commission of the Act charged as an offence, nor be
subjected to a penalty greater than that which might have
been inflicted under the law in force at the time of the
commission of the offence.
(2) No person shall be prosecuted and punished for
the same offence more than once.
(3) No person accused of any offence shall be compelled
to be a witness against himself.

Protection of life
and personal
liberty.

21. No person shall be deprived of his life or personal
liberty except according to procedure established by law.

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 2, for ”sub-clauses
(d), (e) and (f)” (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2
Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 3, for certain words.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

11

(Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Arts. 21A-22.)
*[21A. The State shall provide free and compulsory
education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years
in such manner as the State may, by law, determine.]
22. (1) No person who is arrested shall be detained in
custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of the
grounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right to
consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his
choice.
(2) Every person who is arrested and detained in
custody shall be produced before the nearest magistrate
within a period of twenty-four hours of such arrest
excluding the time necessary for the journey from the
place of arrest to the court of the magistrate and no such
person shall be detained in custody beyond the said
period without the authority of a magistrate.
(3) Nothing in clauses (1) and (2) shall apply—
(a) to any person who for the time being is an enemy
alien; or
(b) to any person who is arrested or detained under
any law providing for preventive detention.
**(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall
authorise the detention of a person for a longer period
than three months unless—
(a) an Advisory Board consisting of persons who
are, or have been, or are qualified to be appointed

Right to education.

Protection against
arrest and
detention in
certain cases.

*Ins by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 2 (which is not yet in force, date
to be notified later on).
**Cl. (4) shall stand substituted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 3
(which is yet not in force, date to be notified later on) as—
“(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the detention of a
person for a longer period than two months unless an Advisory Board constituted in
acordance with the recommendations of the Chief Justice of the appropriate Hight Court
has reported before the expiration of the said period of two months that there is in its
opinion sufficient cause for such detention:
Provided that an Advisory Board shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two
other members, and the Chairman shall be a serving Judge of the appropriate High
Court and the other menbers shall be serving or retired Judges of any High Court:
Provided further that nothing in this clause shall authorise the detention of any
person beyond the maximum period prescribed by any law made by Parliament under
sub-clause (a) of clause (7).
Explanation.—In this clause, “appropriate High Court” means,—
(i) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention
made by the Government of India or an officer or authority subordinate to that Government,
the High Court for the Union territory of Delhi;
(ii) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention
made by the Government of any State (other than a Union territory), the High Court for
the State; and
(iii) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention
made by the administrator of a Union territory or an officer or authority subordinate to
such administrator, such High Court as may be specified by or under any law made by
Parliament in this behalf.”

12

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Art. 22.)
as, Judges of a High Court has reported before the
expiration of the said period of three months that there
is in its opinion sufficient cause for such detention:
Provided that nothing in this sub-clause shall
authorise the detention of any person beyond the
maximum period prescribed by any law made by
Parliament under sub-clause (b) of clause (7); or
(b) such person is detained in accordance with the
provisions of any law made by Parliament under subclauses (a) and (b) of clause (7).
(5) When any person is detained in pursuance of an
order made under any law providing for preventive
detention, the authority making the order shall, as soon
as may be, communicate to such person the grounds on
which the order has been made and shall afford him the
earliest opportunity of making a representation against
the order.
(6) Nothing in clause (5) shall require the authority
making any such order as is referred to in that clause to
disclose facts which such authority considers to be against
the public interest to disclose.
(7) Parliament may by law prescribe—
*(a) the circumstances under which, and the class
or classes of cases in which, a person may be detained
for a period longer than three months under any law
providing for preventive detention without obtaining
the opinion of an Advisory Board in accordance with
the provisions of sub-clause (a) of clause (4);
**(b) the maximum period for which any person
may in any class or classes of cases be detained under
any law providing for preventive detention; and
(c) the procedure to be followed by an Advisory
Board in an inquiry under ***[sub-clause (a) of clause
(4)].
*Sub-clause (a) shall stand omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act,
1978, s. 3 (which is yet not in force, date to be notified later on).
**Sub-clause (b) shall stand relettered as sub-clause (a) by s. 3, ibid. (which is yet not in
force, date to be notified later on).
***The words, letter and figure in brackets shall stand substituted as “clause (4)” by
s. 3, ibid. (which is yet not in force, date to be notified later on).

13

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Arts. 23—26.)
Right against Exploitation
23. (1) Traffic in human beings and begar and other
similar forms of forced labour are prohibited and any
contravention of this provision shall be an offence
punishable in accordance with law.
(2) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from
imposing compulsory service for public purposes, and in
imposing such service the State shall not make any
discrimination on grounds only of religion, race, caste or
class or any of them.
24. No child below the age of fourteen years shall be
employed to work in any factory or mine or engaged in
any other hazardous employment.
Right to Freedom of Religion
25. (1) Subject to public order, morality and health
and to the other provisions of this Part, all persons are
equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right
freely to profess, practise and propagate religion.
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation
of any existing law or prevent the State from making
any law—
(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial,
political or other secular activity which may be
associated with religious practice;
(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the
throwing open of Hindu religious institutions of a
public character to all classes and sections of Hindus.
Explanation I.—The wearing and carrying of kirpans
shall be deemed to be included in the profession of the
Sikh religion.
Explanation II.—In sub-clause (b) of clause (2), the
reference to Hindus shall be construed as including a
reference to persons professing the Sikh, Jaina or
Buddhist religion, and the reference to Hindu religious
institutions shall be construed accordingly.
26. Subject to public order, morality and health, every
religious denomination or any section thereof shall have
the right—
(a) to establish and maintain institutions for
religious and charitable purposes;
(b) to manage its own affairs in matters of religion;

Prohibition of
traffic in human
beings and forced
labour.

Prohibition of
employment of
children in
factories, etc.
Freedom of
conscience and free
profession, practice
and propagation of
religion.

Freedom to
manage religious
affairs.

14

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Arts. 26—30.)
(c) to own and acquire movable and immovable
property; and
(d) to administer such property in accordance with
law.
Freedom as to
payment of taxes
for promotion of
any particular
religion.
Freedom as to
attendance at
religious
instruction or
religious worship
in certain
educational
institutions.

27. No person shall be compelled to pay any taxes,
the proceeds of which are specifically appropriated in
payment of expenses for the promotion or maintenance
of any particular religion or religious denomination.
28. (1) No religious instruction shall be provided in
any educational institution wholly maintained out of State
funds.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to an educational
institution which is administered by the State but has
been established under any endowment or trust which
requires that religious instruction shall be imparted in
such institution.
(3) No person attending any educational institution
recognised by the State or receiving aid out of State funds
shall be required to take part in any religious instruction
that may be imparted in such institution or to attend any
religious worship that may be conducted in such
institution or in any premises attached thereto unless such
person or, if such person is a minor, his guardian has
given his consent thereto.
Cultural and Educational Rights

Protection of
interests of
minorities.

29. (1) Any section of the citizens residing in the
territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct
language, script or culture of its own shall have the right
to conserve the same.
(2) No citizen shall be denied admission into any
educational institution maintained by the State or
receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of
religion, race, caste, language or any of them.

Right of minorities
to establish and
administer
educational
institutions.

1

30. (1) All minorities, whether based on religion or
language, shall have the right to establish and administer
educational institutions of their choice.
1
[(1A) In making any law providing for the
compulsory acquisition of any property of an educational
institution established and administered by a minority,

Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 4 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

15

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Arts. 30—31A.)
referred to in clause (1), the State shall ensure that the
amount fixed by or determined under such law for the
acquisition of such property is such as would not restrict
or abrogate the right guaranteed under that clause.]
(2) The State shall not, in granting aid to educational
institutions, discriminate against any educational
institution on the ground that it is under the management
of a minority, whether based on religion or language.
1

*

*

*

31. [Compulsory acquisition of property.] Rep. by the
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 6 (w.e.f.
20-6-1979).
2

[Saving of Certain Laws]

3

[31A. 4[(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
article 13, no law providing for—
(a) the acquisition by the State of any estate or of
any rights therein or the extinguishment or
modification of any such rights, or

Saving of laws
providing for
acquisition of
estates, etc.

(b) the taking over of the management of any
property by the State for a limited period either in
the public interest or in order to secure the proper
management of the property, or
(c) the amalgamation of two or more corporations
either in the public interest or in order to secure the
proper management of any of the corporations,
or
(d) the extinguishment or modification of any
rights of managing agents, secretaries and treasurers,
managing directors, directors or managers of
corporations, or of any voting rights of shareholders
thereof, or
1
The sub-heading “Right to Property” omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth
Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 5 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3
Ins. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 4 (with retrospective effect).
4
Subs. by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 3, for cl. (1) (with
retrospective effect).

16

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Art. 31A.)
(e) the extinguishment or modification of any
rights accruing by virtue of any agreement, lease or
licence for the purpose of searching for, or winning,
any mineral or mineral oil, or the premature
termination or cancellation of any such agreement,
lease or licence,
shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is
inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the
rights conferred by 1[article 14 or article 19]:
Provided that where such law is a law made by the
Legislature of a State, the provisions of this article shall
not apply thereto unless such law, having been reserved
for the consideration of the President, has received his
assent:]
2

[Provided further that where any law makes any
provision for the acquisition by the State of any estate
and where any land comprised therein is held by a person
under his personal cultivation, it shall not be lawful for
the State to acquire any portion of such land as is within
the ceiling limit applicable to him under any law for the
time being in force or any building or structure standing
thereon or appurtenant thereto, unless the law relating
to the acquisition of such land, building or structure,
provides for payment of compensation at a rate which
shall not be less than the market value thereof.]
(2) In this article,—
3

[(a) the expression ''estate'' shall, in relation to
any local area, have the same meaning as that
expression or its local equivalent has in the existing
law relating to land tenures in force in that area and
shall also include—
(i) any jagir, inam or muafi or other similar grant
and in the States of 4[Tamil Nadu] and Kerala,
any janmam right;
1

Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 7, for “article 14,
article 19 or article 31” (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964, s. 2.
3
Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for sub-clause (a) (with retrospective effect).
4
Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968 (53 of 1968), s. 4, for
“Madras”. (w.e..f. 14-1-1969).

17

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Arts. 31A—31C.)
(ii) any land held under ryotwari settlement;
(iii) any land held or let for purposes of
agriculture or for purposes ancillary thereto,
including waste land, forest land, land for pasture
or sites of buildings and other structures occupied
by cultivators of land, agricultural labourers and
village artisans;]
(b) the expression ''rights'', in relation to an estate,
shall include any rights vesting in a proprietor, subproprietor, under-proprietor, tenure-holder, 1[raiyat,
under-raiyat] or other intermediary and any rights or
privileges in respect of land revenue.]
2

[31B. Without prejudice to the generality of the
provisions contained in article 31A, none of the Acts and
Regulations specified in the Ninth Schedule nor any of
the provisions thereof shall be deemed to be void,
or ever to have become void, on the ground that such Act,
Regulation or provision is inconsistent with, or takes
away or abridges any of the rights conferred by, any
provisions of this Part, and notwithstanding any
judgment, decree or order of any court or Tribunal to the
contrary, each of the said Acts and Regulations shall,
subject to the power of any competent Legislature to
repeal or amend it, continue in force.]
3

[31C. Notwithstanding anything contained in article
13, no law giving effect to the policy of the State towards
securing 4[all or any of the principles laid down in Part
IV] shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is
inconsistent with, or takes away or abridges any of the
rights conferred by 5[article 14 or article 19]; 6and no law
1

Validation of
certain Acts and
Regulations.

Saving of laws
giving effect to
certain directive
principles.

Ins. by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 3 (with retrospective effect).
Ins. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 5.
3
Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20-4-1972).
4
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 4, for “the principles
specified in clause (b) or clause (c) of article 39” (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). Section 4 has been declared
invalid by the Supreme Court in Minerva Mills Ltd. and others vs. Union of India and others
(1980) 2. S.C.C. 591.
5
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 8, for “article 14,
article 19 or article 31” (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
6
In Kesavananda Bharati vs. The State of Kerala, (1973) Supp. S.C.R. 1, the Supreme Court
held the provisions in italics to be invalid.
2

18

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Arts. 31C—32A.)
containing a declaration that it is for giving effect to such
policy shall be called in question in any court on the ground
that it does not give effect to such policy:
Provided that where such law is made by the
Legislature of a State, the provisions of this article shall not
apply thereto unless such law, having been reserved for
the consideration of the President, has received his assent.
1

31D. [Saving of laws in respect of anti-national activities.]
Rep. by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977,
s. 2 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
Right to Constitutional Remedies
Remedies for
enforcement of
rights conferred by
this Part.

32. (1) The right to move the Supreme Court by
appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the rights
conferred by this Part is guaranteed.
(2) The Supreme Court shall have power to issue
directions or orders or writs, including writs in the nature
of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and
certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for the
enforcement of any of the rights conferred by this Part.
(3) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on the
Supreme Court by clauses (1) and (2), Parliament may by
law empower any other court to exercise within the local
limits of its jurisdiction all or any of the powers exercisable
by the Supreme Court under clause (2).
(4) The right guaranteed by this article shall not be
suspended except as otherwise provided for by this
Constitution.
2

32A. [Constitutional validity of State laws not to be
considered in proceedings under article 32.] Rep. by the
Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 3 (w.e.f.
13-4-1978).

1
2

Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 5 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).

19

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Arts. 33—35.)
1

[33. Parliament may, by law, determine to what extent
any of the rights conferred by this Part shall, in their
application to,—
(a) the members of the Armed Forces; or
(b) the members of the Forces charged with the
maintenance of public order; or

Power of
Parliament to
modify the rights
conferred by this
Part in their
application to
Forces, etc.

(c) persons employed in any bureau or other
organisation established by the State for purposes of
intelligence or counter intelligence; or
(d) person employed in, or in connection with,
the telecommunication systems set up for the
purposes of any Force, bureau or organisation
referred to in clauses (a) to (c),
be restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the proper
discharge of their duties and the maintenance of
discipline among them.]
34. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing
provisions of this Part, Parliament may by law indemnify
any person in the service of the Union or of a State or
any other person in respect of any act done by him in
connection with the maintenance or restoration of order
in any area within the territory of India where martial
law was in force or validate any sentence passed,
punishment inflicted, forfeiture ordered or other act done
under martial law in such area.

Restriction on
rights conferred by
this Part while
martial law is in
force in any area.

35. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—

Legislation to give
effect to the
provisions of this
Part.

(a) Parliament shall have, and the Legislature of
a State shall not have, power to make laws—
(i) with respect to any of the matters which
under clause (3) of article 16, clause (3) of article
32, article 33 and article 34 may be provided for
by law made by Parliament; and
(ii) for prescribing punishment for those acts
which are declared to be offences under this Part;
1

Subs. by the Constitution (Fiftieth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2, for art. 33.

20

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part III.—Fundamental Rights.—Art. 35.)
and Parliament shall, as soon as may be after the
commencement of this Constitution, make laws
for prescribing punishment for the acts referred
to in sub-clause (ii);
(b) any law in force immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution in the territory
of India with respect to any of the matters referred to
in sub-clause (i) of clause (a) or providing for
punishment for any act referred to in sub-clause (ii)
of that clause shall, subject to the terms thereof and
to any adaptations and modifications that may be
made therein under article 372, continue in force until
altered or repealed or amended by Parliament.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression “law in
force” has the same meaning as in article 372.

PART IV
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY
36. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,
“the State” has the same meaning as in Part III.

Definition.

37. The provisions contained in this Part shall not be
enforceable by any court, but the principles therein laid
down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of
the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply
these principles in making laws.

Application of the
principles
contained in this
Part.

38. 1[(1)] The State shall strive to promote the welfare
of the people by securing and protecting as effectively as
it may a social order in which justice, social, economic
and political, shall inform all the institutions of the
national life.

State to secure a
social order for
the promotion of
welfare of the
people.

2

[(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimise
the inequalities in income, and endeavour to eliminate
inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities, not
only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of
people residing in different areas or engaged in different
vocations.]
39. The State shall, in particular, direct its policy
towards securing—
(a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have
the right to an adequate means of livelihood;

Certain principles
of policy to be
followed by the
State.

(b) that the ownership and control of the material
resources of the community are so distributed as best
to subserve the common good;
(c) that the operation of the economic system does
not result in the concentration of wealth and means
of production to the common detriment;
(d) that there is equal pay for equal work for both
men and women;
1
Art. 38 renumbered as cl. (1) thereof by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 9 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2
Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f 20-6-1979).

21

22

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IV.—Directive Principles of State Policy.—
Arts. 39—43.)
(e) that the health and strength of workers, men
and women, and the tender age of children are not
abused and that citizens are not forced by economic
necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age or
strength;
1

[(f) that children are given opportunities and
facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in
conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood
and youth are protected against exploitation and
against moral and material abandonment.]
2

Equal justice and
free legal aid.

[39A. The State shall secure that the operation of the
legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal
opportunity, and shall, in particular, provide free legal
aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any other
way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are
not denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other
disabilities.]

Organisation of
village panchayats.

40. The State shall take steps to organise village
panchayats and endow them with such powers and
authority as may be necessary to enable them to function
as units of self-government.

Right to work, to
education and to
public assistance
in certain cases.

41. The State shall, within the limits of its economic
capacity and development, make effective provision for
securing the right to work, to education and to public
assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness
and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want.

Provision for just
and humane
conditions of work
and maternity
relief.

42. The State shall make provision for securing just
and humane conditions of work and for maternity relief.

Living wage, etc.,
for workers.

43. The State shall endeavour to secure, by suitable
legislation or economic organisation or in any other way,
to all workers, agricultural, industrial or otherwise, work,
a living wage, conditions of work ensuring a decent

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 7, for cl. (f) (w.e.f.
3-1-1977).
2
Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

23

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IV.—Directive Principles of State Policy.—
Arts. 43—48A.)
standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and social
and cultural opportunities and, in particular, the State
shall endeavour to promote cottage industries on an
individual or co-operative basis in rural areas.
1

[43A. The State shall take steps, by suitable legislation
or in any other way, to secure the participation of workers
in the management of undertakings, establishments or
other organisations engaged in any industry.]

Participation of
workers in
management of
industries.

44. The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens
a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.

Uniform civil code
for the citizens.

*[45. The State shall endeavour to provide, within a
period of ten years from the commencement of this
Constitution, for free and compulsory education for all
children until they complete the age of fourteen years.]

Provision for free
and compulsory
education for
children.

46. The State shall promote with special care the
educational and economic interests of the weaker sections
of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from
social injustice and all forms of exploitation.

Promotion of
educational and
economic interests
of Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and other
weaker sections.

47. The State shall regard the raising of the level of
nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the
improvement of public health as among its primary
duties and, in particular, the State shall endeavour to
bring about prohibition of the consumption except for
medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs
which are injurious to health.

Duty of the State
to raise the level
of nutrition and
the standard of
living and to
improve public
health.

48. The State shall endeavour to organise agriculture
and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines
and shall, in particular, take steps for preserving and
improving the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of
cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle.

Organisation of
agriculture and
animal husbandry.

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 9 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
*Art. 45 shall stand substituted by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act,
2002, s. 3 (which is yet not in force, date to be notified later on) as—
“45. Provision for early childhood care and education to children below the
age of six years.—The State shall endeavour to provide early childhood care and education
for all children until they complete the age of six years.”.

24

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IV.—Directive Principles of State Policy.—
Arts. 48A—51.)
1

Protection and
improvement of
environment and
safeguarding of
forests and wild
life.

[48A. The State shall endeavour to protect and
improve the environment and to safeguard the forests
and wild life of the country.]

Protection of
monuments and
places and objects
of national
importance.

49. It shall be the obligation of the State to protect
every monument or place or object of artistic or historic
interest, 2[declared by or under law made by Parliament]
to be of national importance, from spoliation,
disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export,
as the case may be.

Separation of
judiciary from
executive.

50. The State shall take steps to separate the judiciary
from the executive in the public services of the State.

Promotion of
international peace
and security.

51. The State shall endeavour to—
(a) promote international peace and security;
(b) maintain just and honourable relations between
nations;
(c) foster respect for international law and treaty
obligations in the dealings of organized peoples with
one another; and
(d) encourage settlement of international disputes
by arbitration.

1
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 10 (w.e.f.
3-1-1977).
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 27, for “declared by
Parliament by law”.

1

[PART IVA

FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES
51A. It shall be the duty of every citizen of India—
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its
ideals and institutions, the National Flag and the
National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which
inspired our national struggle for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity
and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national
service when called upon to do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common
brotherhood amongst all the people of India
transcending religious, linguistic and regional or
sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory
to the dignity of women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our
composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment
including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and to
have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and
the spirit of inquiry and reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure
violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of
individual and collective activity so that the nation
constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and
achievement;
*[(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide
opportunities for education to his child or, as the
case may be, ward between the age of six and
fourteen years.]
1

Fundamental
duties.

Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 11 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
*Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 4 (which is yet not in
force, date to be notified later on).

25

PART V
THE UNION
CHAPTER I.—THE EXECUTIVE
The President and Vice-President
The President of
India.
Executive power
of the Union.

52. There shall be a President of India.

53. (1) The executive power of the Union shall be
vested in the President and shall be exercised by him
either directly or through officers subordinate to him in
accordance with this Constitution.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing provision, the supreme command of the
Defence Forces of the Union shall be vested in the
President and the exercise thereof shall be regulated by
law.
(3) Nothing in this article shall—
(a) be deemed to transfer to the President any
functions conferred by any existing law on the
Government of any State or other authority; or
(b) prevent Parliament from conferring by law
functions on authorities other than the President.

Election of
President.

54. The President shall be elected by the members of
an electoral college consisting of—
(a) the elected members of both Houses of
Parliament; and
(b) the elected members of the Legislative
Assemblies of the States.
1
[Explanation.—In this article and in article 55, ''State''
includes the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the
Union territory of *Pondicherry.]

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Seventieth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-6-1995).
*Now Puducherry, vide the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006, s. 3 (w.e.f.
1-10-2006).

26

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

27

(Part V.—The Union.—Art. 55.)
55. (1) As far as practicable, there shall be uniformity
in the scale of representation of the different States at the
election of the President.

Manner of election
of President.

(2) For the purpose of securing such uniformity
among the States inter se as well as parity between the
States as a whole and the Union, the number of votes
which each elected member of Parliament and of the
Legislative Assembly of each State is entitled to cast at
such election shall be determined in the following
manner:—
(a) every elected member of the Legislative
Assembly of a State shall have as many votes as
there are multiples of one thousand in the quotient
obtained by dividing the population of the State by
the total number of the elected members of the
Assembly;
(b) if, after taking the said multiples of one
thousand, the remainder is not less than five
hundred, then the vote of each member referred to
in sub-clause (a) shall be further increased by one;
(c) each elected member of either House of
Parliament shall have such number of votes as may
be obtained by dividing the total number of votes
assigned to the members of the Legislative
Assemblies of the States under sub-clauses (a) and
(b) by the total number of the elected members of
both Houses of Parliament, fractions exceeding onehalf being counted as one and other fractions being
disregarded.
(3) The election of the President shall be held in
accordance with the system of proportional
representation by means of the single transferable vote
and the voting at such election shall be by secret ballot.
1

[Explanation.—In this article, the expression
''population'' means the population as ascertained at the
last preceding census of which the relevant figures have
been published:
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the
last preceding census of which the relevant figures have
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 12, for the Explanation
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

28

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 55—58.)
been published shall, until the relevant figures for the
first census taken after the year 1[2026] have been
published, be construed as a reference to the 1971 census.]
Term of office of
President.

56. (1) The President shall hold office for a term of
five years from the date on which he enters upon his
office:
Provided that—
(a) the President may, by writing under his hand
addressed to the Vice-President, resign his office;
(b) the President may, for violation of the
Constitution, be removed from office by impeachment
in the manner provided in article 61;
(c) the President shall, notwithstanding the
expiration of his term, continue to hold office until
his successor enters upon his office.
(2) Any resignation addressed to the Vice-President
under clause (a) of the proviso to clause (1) shall forthwith
be communicated by him to the Speaker of the House of
the People.

Eligibility for reelection.

57. A person who holds, or who has held, office as
President shall, subject to the other provisions of this
Constitution, be eligible for re-election to that office.

Qualifications for
election as
President.

58. (1) No person shall be eligible for election as
President unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India,
(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years, and
(c) is qualified for election as a member of the
House of the People.
(2) A person shall not be eligible for election as
President if he holds any office of profit under the
Government of India or the Government of any State or
under any local or other authority subject to the control
of any of the said Governments.

1

Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 2, for “2000”.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

29

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 58—60.)
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, a person
shall not be deemed to hold any office of profit by reason
only that he is the President or Vice-President of the
Union or the Governor 1*** of any State or is a Minister
either for the Union or for any State.
59. (1) The President shall not be a member of either
House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of
any State, and if a member of either House of Parliament
or of a House of the Legislature of any State be elected
President, he shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in
that House on the date on which he enters upon his
office as President.

Conditions of
President's office.

(2) The President shall not hold any other office of
profit.
(3) The President shall be entitled without payment
of rent to the use of his official residences and shall be
also entitled to such emoluments, allowances and
privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law
and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such
emoluments, allowances and privileges as are specified
in the Second Schedule.
(4) The emoluments and allowances of the President
shall not be diminished during his term of office.
60. Every President and every person acting as
President or discharging the functions of the President
shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe
in the presence of the Chief Justice of India or, in his
absence, the senior-most Judge of the Supreme Court
available, an oath or affirmation in the following form,
that is to say—
"I, A.B., do

swear in the name of God
solemnly affirm

Oath or affirmation
by the President.

that I will faith-

fully execute the office of President (or discharge
the functions of the President) of India and will to the
best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the
1
The words “or Rajpramukh or Uparajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.

30

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 60—62.)
Constitution and the law and that I will devote myself to
the service and well-being of the people of India”.
Procedure for
impeachment of
the President.

61. (1) When a President is to be impeached for
violation of the Constitution, the charge shall be preferred
by either House of Parliament.
(2) No such charge shall be preferred unless—
(a) the proposal to prefer such charge is contained
in a resolution which has been moved after at least
fourteen days' notice in writing signed by not less
than one-fourth of the total number of members of
the House has been given of their intention to move
the resolution, and
(b) such resolution has been passed by a majority
of not less than two-thirds of the total membership
of the House.
(3) When a charge has been so preferred by either
House of Parliament, the other House shall investigate
the charge or cause the charge to be investigated and the
President shall have the right to appear and to be
represented at such investigation.
(4) If as a result of the investigation a resolution is
passed by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the
total membership of the House by which the charge was
investigated or caused to be investigated, declaring that
the charge preferred against the President has been
sustained, such resolution shall have the effect of removing
the President from his office as from the date on which
the resolution is so passed.

Time of holding
election to fill
vacancy in the
office of President
and the term of
office of person
elected to fill
casual vacancy.

62. (1) An election to fill a vacancy caused by the
expiration of the term of office of President shall be
completed before the expiration of the term.
(2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of
President occurring by reason of his death, resignation or
removal, or otherwise shall be held as soon as possible
after, and in no case later than six months from, the date
of occurrence of the vacancy; and the person elected to fill
the vacancy shall, subject to the provisions of article 56,

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

31

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 62—66.)
be entitled to hold office for the full term of five years from
the date on which he enters upon his office.
63. There shall be a Vice-President of India.

64. The Vice-President shall be ex officio Chairman of
the Council of States and shall not hold any other office
of profit:

The Vice-President
of India.
The Vice-President
to be ex officio
Chairman of the
Council of States.

Provided that during any period when the VicePresident acts as President or discharges the functions of
the President under article 65, he shall not perform the
duties of the office of Chairman of the Council of States
and shall not be entitled to any salary or allowance
payable to the Chairman of the Council of States under
article 97.
65. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy
in the office of the President by reason of his death,
resignation or removal, or otherwise, the Vice-President
shall act as President until the date on which a new
President elected in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter to fill such vacancy enters upon his office.

The Vice-President
to act as President
or to discharge his
functions during
casual vacancies in
the office, or
during the absence,
of President.

(2) When the President is unable to discharge his
functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause,
the Vice-President shall discharge his functions until the
date on which the President resumes his duties.
(3) The Vice-President shall, during, and in respect
of, the period while he is so acting as, or discharging the
functions of, President, have all the powers and
immunities of the President and be entitled to such
emoluments, allowances and privileges as may be
determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in
that behalf is so made, such emoluments, allowances
and privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule.
66. (1) The Vice-President shall be elected by the
[members of an electoral college consisting of the
members of both Houses of Parliament] in accordance
1

Election of VicePresident.

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Eleventh Amendment) Act, 1961, s. 2, for “members of both
Houses of Parliament assembled at a joint meeting”.

32

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 66—67.)
with the system of proportional representation by means
of the single transferable vote and the voting at such
election shall be by secret ballot.
(2) The Vice-President shall not be a member of either
House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of
any State, and if a member of either House of Parliament
or of a House of the Legislature of any State be elected
Vice-President, he shall be deemed to have vacated his
seat in that House on the date on which he enters upon
his office as Vice-President.
(3) No person shall be eligible for election as VicePresident unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India;
(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years; and
(c) is qualified for election as a member of the
Council of States.
(4) A person shall not be eligible for election as VicePresident if he holds any office of profit under the
Government of India or the Government of any State or
under any local or other authority subject to the control
of any of the said Governments.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, a person
shall not be deemed to hold any office of profit by reason
only that he is the President or Vice-President of the
Union or the Governor 1*** of any State or is a Minister
either for the Union or for any State.
Term of office of
Vice-President.

67. The Vice-President shall hold office for a term of
five years from the date on which he enters upon his
office:
Provided that—
(a) a Vice-President may, by writing under his hand
addressed to the President, resign his office;

1
The words “or Rajpramukh or Uparajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

33

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 67—71.)
(b) a Vice-President may be removed from his office
by a resolution of the Council of States passed by a
majority of all the then members of the Council and
agreed to by the House of the People; but no resolution
for the purpose of this clause shall be moved unless
at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the
intention to move the resolution;
(c) a Vice-President shall, notwithstanding the
expiration of his term, continue to hold office until
his successor enters upon his office.
68. (1) An election to fill a vacancy caused by the
expiration of the term of office of Vice-President shall be
completed before the expiration of the term.
(2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of VicePresident occurring by reason of his death, resignation or
removal, or otherwise shall be held as soon as possible
after the occurrence of the vacancy, and the person elected
to fill the vacancy shall, subject to the provisions of
article 67, be entitled to hold office for the full term of five
years from the date on which he enters upon his office.
69. Every Vice-President shall, before entering upon
his office, make and subscribe before the President, or
some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or
affirmation in the following form, that is to say—
“I, A.B., do

swear in the name of God
solemnly affirm

Time of holding
election to fill
vacancy in the
office of VicePresident and the
term of office of
person elected to
fill casual vacancy.

Oath or affirmation
by the VicePresident.

that I will bear true

faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by
law established and that I will faithfully discharge the
duty upon which I am about to enter.”
70. Parliament may make such provisions as it thinks
fit for the discharge of the functions of the President in
any contingency not provided for in this Chapter.
1

[71. (1) All doubts and disputes arising out of or in
connection with the election of a President or VicePresident shall be inquired into and decided by the
Supreme Court whose decision shall be final.

Discharge of
President's
functions in other
contingencies.
Matters relating
to, or connected
with, the election
of a President or
Vice-President.

1
Art. 71 has been successively subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment)
Act, 1975, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10-8-1975) and the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 10, to read as above (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

34

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 71—72.)
(2) If the election of a person as President or VicePresident is declared void by the Supreme Court, acts
done by him in the exercise and performance of the
powers and duties of the office of President or VicePresident, as the case may be, on or before the date of
the decision of the Supreme Court shall not be invalidated
by reason of that declaration.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
Parliament may by law regulate any matter relating to or
connected with the election of a President or VicePresident.
(4) The election of a person as President or VicePresident shall not be called in question on the ground
of the existence of any vacancy for whatever reason
among the members of the electoral college electing him.]
Power of President
to grant pardons,
etc., and to
suspend, remit or
commute sentences
in certain cases.

72. (1) The President shall have the power to grant
pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment
or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any
person convicted of any offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence
is by a Court Martial;
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence
is for an offence against any law relating to a matter
to which the executive power of the Union extends;
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of
death.
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect
the power conferred by law on any officer of the Armed
Forces of the Union to suspend, remit or commute a
sentence passed by a Court Martial.
(3) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of clause (1) shall affect
the power to suspend, remit or commute a sentence of
death exercisable by the Governor 1*** of a State under
any law for the time being in force.

1
The words “or Rajpramukh “ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

35

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 73—74.)
73. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
the executive power of the Union shall extend—

Extent of executive
power of the
Union.

(a) to the matters with respect to which Parliament
has power to make laws; and
(b) to the exercise of such rights, authority and
jurisdiction as are exercisable by the Government of
India by virtue of any treaty or agreement:
Provided that the executive power referred to in subclause (a) shall not, save as expressly provided in this
Constitution or in any law made by Parliament, extend in
any State 1*** to matters with respect to which the
Legislature of the State has also power to make laws.
(2) Until otherwise provided by Parliament, a State
and any officer or authority of a State may,
notwithstanding anything in this article, continue to
exercise in matters with respect to which Parliament has
power to make laws for that State such executive power
or functions as the State or officer or authority thereof
could exercise immediately before the commencement of
this Constitution.
Council of Ministers
74. 2[(1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with
the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the
President who shall, in the exercise of his functions, act
in accordance with such advice:]

Council of
Ministers to aid
and advise
President.

3
[Provided that the President may require the Council
of Ministers to reconsider such advice, either generally
or otherwise, and the President shall act in accordance
with the advice tendered after such reconsideration.]

(2) The question whether any, and if so what, advice
was tendered by Ministers to the President shall not be
inquired into in any court.

1

The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 13, for cl. (1) (w.e.f.
3-1-1977).
3
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 11 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

36

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 75—76.)
Other provisions as
to Ministers.

75. (1) The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the
President and the other Ministers shall be appointed by
the President on the advice of the Prime Minister.
1

[(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the
Prime Minister, in the Council of Ministers shall not
exceed fifteen per cent. of the total number of members
of the House of the People.
(1B) A member of either House of Parliament
belonging to any political party who is disqualified for
being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of the
Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed
as a Minister under clause (1) for duration of the period
commencing from the date of his disqualification till the
date on which the term of his office as such member
would expire or where he contests any election to either
House of Parliament before the expiry of such period, till
the date on which he is declared elected, whichever is
earlier.]
(2) The Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure
of the President.
(3) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively
responsible to the House of the People.
(4) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the
President shall administer to him the oaths of office and
of secrecy according to the forms set out for the purpose
in the Third Schedule.
(5) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive
months is not a member of either House of Parliament
shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.
(6) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be
such as Parliament may from time to time by law
determine and, until Parliament so determines, shall be
as specified in the Second Schedule.
The Attorney-General for India
Attorney-General
for India.

76. (1) The President shall appoint a person who is
qualified to be appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court
to be Attorney-General for India.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Attorney-General to
give advice to the Government of India upon such legal

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2.

37

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 76—78.)
matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal
character, as may from time to time be referred or
assigned to him by the President, and to discharge the
functions conferred on him by or under this Constitution
or any other law for the time being in force.
(3) In the performance of his duties the AttorneyGeneral shall have right of audience in all courts in the
territory of India.
(4) The Attorney-General shall hold office during the
pleasure of the President, and shall receive such
remuneration as the President may determine.
Conduct of Government Business
77. (1) All executive action of the Government of
India shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the
President.

Conduct of
business of the
Government of
India.

(2) Orders and other instruments made and executed
in the name of the President shall be authenticated in
such manner as may be specified in rules1 to be made by
the President, and the validity of an order or instrument
which is so authenticated shall not be called in question
on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made
or executed by the President.
(3) The President shall make rules for the more
convenient transaction of the business of the Government
of India, and for the allocation among Ministers of the
said business.
2

*

*

*

*

78. It shall be the duty of the Prime Minister—
(a) to communicate to the President all decisions
of the Council of Ministers relating to the
administration of the affairs of the Union and
proposals for legislation;

Duties of Prime
Minister as respects
the furnishing of
information to the
President, etc.

(b) to furnish such information relating to the
administration of the affairs of the Union and
proposals for legislation as the President may call
for; and
1
See Notification No. S. O. 2297, dated the 3rd November, 1958, Gazette of India,
Extraordinary, 1958, Pt. II, Sec. 3(ii), p. 1315, as amended from time to time.
2
Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 14 (w.e.f.
3-1-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 12
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

38

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 78—80.)
(c) if the President so requires, to submit for the
consideration of the Council of Ministers any matter
on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but
which has not been considered by the Council.
CHAPTER II.—PARLIAMENT
General
Constitution of
Parliament.

Composition of the
Council of States.

79. There shall be a Parliament for the Union which
shall consist of the President and two Houses to be known
respectively as the Council of States and the House of
the People.
80. (1) 1[2*** The Council of States] shall consist of—
(a) twelve members to be nominated by the
President in accordance with the provisions of clause
(3); and
(b) not more than two hundred and thirty-eight
representatives of the States 3[and of the Union
territories.]
(2) The allocation of seats in the Council of States to
be filled by representatives of the States 3[and of the Union
territories] shall be in accordance with the provisions in
that behalf contained in the Fourth Schedule.
(3) The members to be nominated by the President
under sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall consist of persons
having special knowledge or practical experience in
respect of such matters as the following, namely:Literature, science, art and social service.
(4) The representatives of each State 4*** in the Council
of States shall be elected by the elected members of the
Legislative Assembly of the State in accordance with the
system of proportional representation by means of the
single transferable vote.
(5) The representatives of the 5[Union territories] in
the Council of States shall be chosen in such manner as
Parliament may by law prescribe.

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 3, for “The Council of
States” (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).
2
The words “subject to the provisions of paragraph 4 of the Tenth Schedule” omitted by
the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).
3
Added by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 3.
4
The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by
s. 3, ibid.
5
Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “States specified in Part C of the First Schedule”.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

39

(Part V.—The Union.—Art. 81.)
1

[81. (1) 2[Subject to the provisions of article 331 3***],
the House of the People shall consist of—
(a) not more than 4[five hundred and thirty
members] chosen by direct election from territorial
constituencies in the States, and
(b) not more than 5[twenty members] to represent
the Union territories, chosen in such manner as
Parliament may by law provide.
(2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),—
(a) there shall be allotted to each State a number
of seats in the House of the People in such manner
that the ratio between that number and the
population of the State is, so far as practicable, the
same for all States; and
(b) each State shall be divided into territorial
constituencies in such manner that the ratio between
the population of each constituency and the number
of seats allotted to it is, so far as practicable, the
same throughout the State:
6
[Provided that the provisions of sub-clause (a) of
this clause shall not be applicable for the purpose of
allotment of seats in the House of the People to any
State so long as the population of that State does not
exceed six millions.]
(3) In this article, the expression “population” means
the population as ascertained at the last preceding census
of which the relevant figures have been published:
7
[Provided that the reference in this clause to the last
preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
published shall, until the relevant figures for the first
census taken after the year 8[2026] have been published,
9
[be construed,—
1

Composition of the
House of the
People.

Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 4, for arts. 81 and 82.
Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974 s. 4, for “Subject to the
provisions of article 331” (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).
3
The words and figure “and paragraph 4 of the Tenth Schedule” omitted by the
Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).
4
Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 63, for
“five hundred and twenty-five members” (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
5
Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-first Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 2, for “twenty-five
members”.
6
Ins. by s. 2, ibid.
7
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 15 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
8
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 3, for “2000”.
9
Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for certain words.
2

40

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 81—83.)
(i) for the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (2)
and the proviso to that clause, as a reference to the
1971 census; and
(ii) for the purposes of sub-clause (b) of clause (2)
as a reference to the 1[2001] census.]]
Readjustment after
each census.

82. Upon the completion of each census, the allocation
of seats in the House of the People to the States and the
division of each State into territorial constituencies shall
be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as
Parliament may by law determine:
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect
representation in the House of the People until the
dissolution of the then existing House:
2

[Provided further that such readjustment shall take
effect from such date as the President may, by order,
specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any
election to the House may be held on the basis of the
territorial constituencies existing before such
readjustment:
Provided also that until the relevant figures for the
first census taken after the year 3[2026] have been
published, it shall not be necessary to 4[readjust—
(i) the allocation of seats in the House of
People to the States as readjusted on the basis of the
1971 census; and
(ii) the division of each State into territorial
constituencies as may be readjusted on the basis of
the 5[2001] census,
under this article.]]
Duration of Houses
of Parliament.

1

83. (1) The Council of States shall not be subject to
dissolution, but as nearly as possible one-third of the
members thereof shall retire as soon as may be on the
expiration of every second year in accordance with the
provisions made in that behalf by Parliament by law.

Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2, for “1991”.
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 16 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 4, for “2000”.
4
Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for certain words.
5
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3, for “1991”.
2

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

41

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 83—86.)
(2) The House of the People, unless sooner dissolved,
shall continue for 1[five years] from the date appointed
for its first meeting and no longer and the expiration of
the said period of 1[five years] shall operate as a
dissolution of the House:
Provided that the said period may, while a
Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, be extended
by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year
at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period
of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.
84. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill
a seat in Parliament unless he—
2

[(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes
before some person authorised in that behalf by the
Election Commission an oath or affirmation
according to the form set out for the purpose in the
Third Schedule;]

Qualification for
membership of
Parliament.

(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States,
not less than thirty years of age and, in the case of
a seat in the House of the People, not less than
twenty-five years of age; and
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be
prescribed in that behalf by or under any law made
by Parliament.
3

[85. (1) The President shall from time to time
summon each House of Parliament to meet at such time
and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not
intervene between its last sitting in one session and the
date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.

Sessions of
Parliament,
prorogation and
dissolution.

(2) The President may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve the House of the People.]
86. (1) The President may address either House of
Parliament or both Houses assembled together, and for
that purpose require the attendance of members.

Right of President
to address and
send messages to
Houses.

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 13, for “six years”
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979). The words “six years” were subs. for the original words “five years” by
the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 17 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 3, for cl. (a).
3
Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 6, for art. 85.

42

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 86—90.)
(2) The President may send messages to either House
of Parliament, whether with respect to a Bill then pending
in Parliament or otherwise, and a House to which any
message is so sent shall with all convenient despatch
consider any matter required by the message to be taken
into consideration.
Special address by
the President.

87. (1) At the commencement of 1[the first session
after each general election to the House of the People
and at the commencement of the first session of each
year] the President shall address both Houses of
Parliament assembled together and inform Parliament of
the causes of its summons.
(2) Provision shall be made by the rules regulating
the procedure of either House for the allotment of time for
discussion of the matters referred to in such address 2***.

Rights of Ministers
and AttorneyGeneral as respects
Houses.

88. Every Minister and the Attorney-General of India
shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take
part in the proceedings of, either House, any joint sitting
of the Houses, and any committee of Parliament of which
he may be named a member, but shall not by virtue of this
article be entitled to vote.
Officers of Parliament

The Chairman and
Deputy Chairman
of the Council of
States.

89. (1) The Vice-President of India shall be ex officio
Chairman of the Council of States.

Vacation and
resignation of, and
removal from, the
office of Deputy
Chairman.

90. A member holding office as Deputy Chairman of
the Council of States—

(2) The Council of States shall, as soon as may be,
choose a member of the Council to be Deputy Chairman
thereof and, so often as the office of Deputy Chairman
becomes vacant, the Council shall choose another member
to be Deputy Chairman thereof.

(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a
member of the Council;
(b) may at any time, by writing under his hand
addressed to the Chairman, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution
of the Council passed by a majority of all the then
members of the Council:

1

Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 7, for “every session”.
The words “and for the precedence of such discussion over other business of the House”
omitted by s. 7, ibid.
2

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

43

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 90—93.)
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause
(c) shall be moved unless at least fourteen days’ notice
has been given of the intention to move the resolution.
91. (1) While the office of Chairman is vacant, or
during any period when the Vice-President is acting as,
or discharging the functions of, President, the duties of
the office shall be performed by the Deputy Chairman,
or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is also vacant, by
such member of the Council of States as the President
may appoint for the purpose.

Power of the
Deputy Chairman
or other person to
perform the duties
of the office of, or
to act as,
Chairman.

(2) During the absence of the Chairman from any
sitting of the Council of States the Deputy Chairman, or,
if he is also absent, such person as may be determined
by the rules of procedure of the Council, or, if no such
person is present, such other person as may be
determined by the Council, shall act as Chairman.
92. (1) At any sitting of the Council of States, while
any resolution for the removal of the Vice-President from
his office is under consideration, the Chairman, or while
any resolution for the removal of the Deputy Chairman
from his office is under consideration, the Deputy
Chairman, shall not, though he is present, preside, and
the provisions of clause (2) of article 91 shall apply in
relation to every such sitting as they apply in relation to
a sitting from which the Chairman, or, as the case may
be, the Deputy Chairman, is absent.

The Chairman or
the Deputy
Chairman not to
preside while a
resolution for his
removal from office
is under
consideration.

(2) The Chairman shall have the right to speak in,
and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the
Council of States while any resolution for the removal of
the Vice-President from his office is under consideration
in the Council, but, notwithstanding anything in article
100, shall not be entitled to vote at all on such resolution
or on any other matter during such proceedings.
93. The House of the People shall, as soon as may be,
choose two members of the House to be respectively
Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as the
office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the
House shall choose another member to be Speaker or
Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.

The Speaker and
Deputy Speaker
of the House of
the People.

44

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 94—96.)
Vacation and
resignation of, and
removal from, the
offices of Speaker
and Deputy
Speaker.

94. A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy
Speaker of the House of the People—
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a
member of the House of the People;
(b) may at any time, by writing under his hand
addressed, if such member is the Speaker, to the
Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy
Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution
of the House of the People passed by a majority of all
the then members of the House:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause
(c) shall be moved unless at least fourteen days' notice
has been given of the intention to move the resolution:
Provided further that, whenever the House of the
People is dissolved, the Speaker shall not vacate his office
until immediately before the first meeting of the House of
the People after the dissolution.

Power of the
Deputy Speaker or
other person to
perform the duties
of the office of, or
to act as, Speaker.

95. (1) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties
of the office shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker or,
if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such
member of the House of the People as the President may
appoint for the purpose.
(2) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting
of the House of the People the Deputy Speaker or, if he
is also absent, such person as may be determined by the
rules of procedure of the House, or, if no such person is
present, such other person as may be determined by the
House, shall act as Speaker.

The Speaker or the
Deputy Speaker
not to preside
while a resolution
for his removal
from office is
under
consideration.

96. (1) At any sitting of the House of the People, while
any resolution for the removal of the Speaker from his
office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any
resolution for the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his
office is under consideration, the Deputy Speaker, shall
not, though he is present, preside, and the provisions of
clause (2) of article 95 shall apply in relation to every

45

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 96—98.)
such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from
which the Speaker, or, as the case may be, the Deputy
Speaker, is absent.
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and
otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the House of
the People while any resolution for his removal from
office is under consideration in the House and shall,
notwithstanding anything in article 100, be entitled to
vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on
any other matter during such proceedings but not in the
case of an equality of votes.
97. There shall be paid to the Chairman and the
Deputy Chairman of the Council of States, and to the
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the
People, such salaries and allowances as may be
respectively fixed by Parliament by law and, until
provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and
allowances as are specified in the Second Schedule.

Salaries and
allowances of the
Chairman and
Deputy Chairman
and the Speaker
and Deputy
Speaker.

98. (1) Each House of Parliament shall have a separate
secretarial staff:

Secretariat of
Parliament.

Provided that nothing in this clause shall be
construed as preventing the creation of posts common
to both Houses of Parliament.
(2) Parliament may by law regulate the recruitment,
and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to
the secretarial staff of either House of Parliament.
(3) Until provision is made by Parliament under
clause (2), the President may, after consultation with the
Speaker of the House of the People or the Chairman of
the Council of States, as the case may be, make rules
regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service
of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of the House
of the People or the Council of States, and any rules so
made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any
law made under the said clause.

46

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 99—101.)
Conduct of Business
Oath or affirmation
by members.

99. Every member of either House of Parliament shall,
before taking his seat, make and subscribe before the
President, or some person appointed in that behalf by
him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out
for the purpose in the Third Schedule.

Voting in Houses,
power of Houses
to act
notwithstanding
vacancies and
quorum.

100. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this
Constitution, all questions at any sitting of either House
or joint sitting of the Houses shall be determined by a
majority of votes of the members present and voting,
other than the Speaker or person acting as Chairman or
Speaker.
The Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such,
shall not vote in the first instance, but shall have and
exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.
(2) Either House of Parliament shall have power to
act notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership
thereof, and any proceedings in Parliament shall be valid
notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that
some person who was not entitled so to do sat or voted
or otherwise took part in the proceedings.
(3) Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the
quorum to constitute a meeting of either House of
Parliament shall be one-tenth of the total number of
members of the House.
(4) If at any time during a meeting of a House there
is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the Chairman or
Speaker, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the
House or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.
Disqualifications of Members

Vacation of seats.

101. (1) No person shall be a member of both Houses
of Parliament and provision shall be made by Parliament
by law for the vacation by a person who is chosen a
member of both Houses of his seat in one House or the
other.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

47

(Part V.—The Union.—Art. 101.)
(2) No person shall be a member both of Parliament
and of a House of the Legislature of a State 1***, and if
a person is chosen a member both of Parliament and of
a House of the Legislature of 2[a State], then, at the
expiration of such period as may be specified in rules3
made by the President, that person's seat in Parliament
shall become vacant, unless he has previously resigned
his seat in the Legislature of the State.
(3) If a member of either House of Parliament—
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications
mentioned in 4[clause (1) or clause (2) of article 102],
or
5

[(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand
addressed to the Chairman or the Speaker, as the
case may be, and his resignation is accepted by the
Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be,]
his seat shall thereupon become vacant:
6

[Provided that in the case of any resignation referred
to in sub-clause (b), if from information received or
otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit,
the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, is
satisfied that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine,
he shall not accept such resignation.]
(4) If for a period of sixty days a member of either
House of Parliament is without permission of the House
absent from all meetings thereof, the House may declare
his seat vacant:
Provided that in computing the said period of sixty
days no account shall be taken of any period during
1
The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2
Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., “such a State”.
3
See the Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950, published with the Ministry
of Law Notification No. F. 46/50-C, dated the 26th January, 1950, Gazette of India,
Extraordinary, p. 678.
4
Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 2, for “clause (1) of
article 102” (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
5
Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-third Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 2, for sub-clause (b).
6
Ins. by s. 2, ibid.

48

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 101—103.)
which the House is prorogued or is adjourned for more
than four consecutive days.
Disqualifications
for membership.

102. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen
as, and for being, a member of either House of
Parliament—
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the
Government of India or the Government of any State,
other than an office declared by Parliament by law
not to disqualify its holder;
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so
declared by a competent court;
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily
acquired the citizenship of a foreign State, or is under
any acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a
foreign State;
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law
made by Parliament.
1
[Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause] a
person shall not be deemed to hold an office of profit
under the Government of India or the Government of
any State by reason only that he is a Minister either for
the Union or for such State.
2

[(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a
member of either House of Parliament if he is so
disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.]
Decision on
questions as to
disqualifications of
members.

3

[103. (1) If any question arises as to whether a member
of either House of Parliament has become subject to any
of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of article
102, the question shall be referred for the decision of the
President and his decision shall be final.

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 3, for “(2) For the
purposes of this article” (w.e.f. 1-3-1985)
2
Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
3
Art. 103 has been successively subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)
Act, 1976, s. 20 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act,
1978, s. 14 to read as above (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

49

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 103—105.)
(2) Before giving any decision on any such question,
the President shall obtain the opinion of the Election
Commission and shall act according to such opinion.]
104. If a person sits or votes as a member of either
House of Parliament before he has complied with the
requirements of article 99, or when he knows that he is
not qualified or that he is disqualified for membership
thereof, or that he is prohibited from so doing by the
provisions of any law made by Parliament, he shall be
liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or votes
to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a
debt due to the Union.

Penalty for sitting
and voting before
making oath or
affirmation under
article 99 or when
not qualified or
when disqualified.

Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament
and its Members
105. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution
and to the rules and standing orders regulating the
procedure of Parliament, there shall be freedom of speech
in Parliament.

Powers, privileges,
etc., of the Houses
of Parliament and
of the members
and committees
thereof.

(2) No member of Parliament shall be liable to any
proceedings in any court in respect of any thing said or
any vote given by him in Parliament or any committee
thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the
publication by or under the authority of either House of
Parliament of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.
(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and
immunities of each House of Parliament, and of the
members and the committees of each House, shall be
such as may from time to time be defined by Parliament
by law, and, until so defined, 1[shall be those of that
House and of its members and committees immediately
before the coming into force of section 15 of the
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978.]
(4) The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall
apply in relation to persons who by virtue of this
Constitution have the right to speak in, and otherwise to

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 15, for certain words
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

50

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 105—108.)
take part in the proceedings of, a House of Parliament or
any committee thereof as they apply in relation to members
of Parliament.
Salaries and
allowances of
members.

106. Members of either House of Parliament shall be
entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may
from time to time be determined by Parliament by law
and, until provision in that respect is so made, allowances
at such rates and upon such conditions as were
immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution applicable in the case of members of the
Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India.
Legislative Procedure

Provisions as to
introduction and
passing of Bills.

107. (1) Subject to the provisions of articles 109 and
117 with respect to Money Bills and other financial Bills,
a Bill may originate in either House of Parliament.
(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 108 and 109,
a Bill shall not be deemed to have been passed by the
Houses of Parliament unless it has been agreed to by
both Houses, either without amendment or with such
amendments only as are agreed to by both Houses.
(3) A Bill pending in Parliament shall not lapse by
reason of the prorogation of the Houses.
(4) A Bill pending in the Council of States which has
not been passed by the House of the People shall not
lapse on a dissolution of the House of the People.
(5) A Bill which is pending in the House of the People,
or which having been passed by the House of the People
is pending in the Council of States, shall, subject to the
provisions of article 108, lapse on a dissolution of the
House of the People.

Joint sitting of both
Houses in certain
cases.

108. (1) If after a Bill has been passed by one House
and transmitted to the other House—
(a) the Bill is rejected by the other House; or
(b) the Houses have finally disagreed as to the
amendments to be made in the Bill; or

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Art. 108.)
(c) more than six months elapse from the date of
the reception of the Bill by the other House without
the Bill being passed by it,
the President may, unless the Bill has elapsed by reason
of a dissolution of the House of the People, notify to the
Houses by message if they are sitting or by public
notification if they are not sitting, his intention to
summon them to meet in a joint sitting for the purpose
of deliberating and voting on the Bill:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to a
Money Bill.
(2) In reckoning any such period of six months as is
referred to in clause (1), no account shall be taken of
any period during which the House referred to in
sub-clause (c) of that clause is prorogued or adjourned for
more than four consecutive days.
(3) Where the President has under clause (1) notified
his intention of summoning the Houses to meet in a
joint sitting, neither House shall proceed further with
the Bill, but the President may at any time after the date
of his notification summon the Houses to meet in a joint
sitting for the purpose specified in the notification and,
if he does so, the Houses shall meet accordingly.
(4) If at the joint sitting of the two Houses the Bill,
with such amendments, if any, as are agreed to in joint
sitting, is passed by a majority of the total number of
members of both Houses present and voting, it shall be
deemed for the purposes of this Constitution to have
been passed by both Houses:
Provided that at a joint sitting—
(a) if the Bill, having been passed by one House,
has not been passed by the other House with
amendments and returned to the House in which it
originated, no amendment shall be proposed to the
Bill other than such amendments (if any) as are made
necessary by the delay in the passage of the Bill;

51

52

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 108-109.)
(b) if the Bill has been so passed and returned,
only such amendments as aforesaid shall be proposed
to the Bill and such other amendments as are relevant
to the matters with respect to which the Houses have
not agreed;
and the decision of the person presiding as to the
amendments which are admissible under this clause shall
be final.
(5) A joint sitting may be held under this article and
a Bill passed thereat, notwithstanding that a dissolution
of the House of the People has intervened since the
President notified his intention to summon the Houses to
meet therein.
Special procedure
in respect of
Money Bills.

109. (1) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in the
Council of States.
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the House
of the People it shall be transmitted to the Council of
States for its recommendations and the Council of States
shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its
receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of the
People with its recommendations and the House of the
People may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of
the recommendations of the Council of States.
(3) If the House of the People accepts any of the
recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill
shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses
with the amendments recommended by the Council of
States and accepted by the House of the People.
(4) If the House of the People does not accept any of
the recommendations of the Council of States, the Money
Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses
in the form in which it was passed by the House of the
People without any of the amendments recommended by
the Council of States.
(5) If a Money Bill passed by the House of the People
and transmitted to the Council of States for its
recommendations is not returned to the House of the

53

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 109-110.)
People within the said period of fourteen days, it shall be
deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the
expiration of the said period in the form in which it was
passed by the House of the People.
110. (1) For the purposes of this Chapter, a Bill shall
be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only
provisions dealing with all or any of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration
or regulation of any tax;
(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or
the giving of any guarantee by the Government of
India, or the amendment of the law with respect to
any financial obligations undertaken or to be
undertaken by the Government of India;
(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the
Contingency Fund of India, the payment of moneys
into or the withdrawal of moneys from any such
Fund;
(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India;
(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be
expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of
India or the increasing of the amount of any such
expenditure;
(f) the receipt of money on account of the
Consolidated Fund of India or the public account of
India or the custody or issue of such money or the
audit of the accounts of the Union or of a State; or
(g) any matter incidental to any of the matters
specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f).
(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by
reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or
other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment
of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by
reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition,
remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local
authority or body for local purposes.

Definition of
“Money Bills”.

54

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 110—112.)
(3) If any question arises whether a Bill is a Money
Bill or not, the decision of the Speaker of the House of
the People thereon shall be final.
(4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when
it is transmitted to the Council of States under
article 109, and when it is presented to the President for
assent under article 111, the certificate of the Speaker of
the House of the People signed by him that it is a Money
Bill.
Assent to Bills.

111. When a Bill has been passed by the Houses of
Parliament, it shall be presented to the President, and
the President shall declare either that he assents to the
Bill, or that he withholds assent therefrom:
Provided that the President may, as soon as possible
after the presentation to him of a Bill for assent, return the
Bill if it is not a Money Bill to the Houses with a message
requesting that they will reconsider the Bill or any
specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will
consider the desirability of introducing any such
amendments as he may recommend in his message, and
when a Bill is so returned, the Houses shall reconsider
the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the
Houses with or without amendment and presented to the
President for assent, the President shall not withhold
assent therefrom.
Procedure in Financial Matters

Annual financial
statement.

112. (1) The President shall in respect of every financial
year cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament
a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of
the Government of India for that year, in this Part referred
to as the “annual financial statement”.
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the
annual financial statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described
by this Constitution as expenditure charged upon
the Consolidated Fund of India; and

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

55

(Part V.—The Union.—Art. 112.)
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure
proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of
India,
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account
from other expenditure.
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India—
(a) the emoluments and allowances of the
President and other expenditure relating to his office;
(b) the salaries and allowances of the Chairman
and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States
and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House
of the People;
(c) debt charges for which the Government of India
is liable including interest, sinking fund charges and
redemption charges, and other expenditure relating
to the raising of loans and the service and redemption
of debt;
(d) (i) the salaries, allowances and pensions
payable to or in respect of Judges of the Supreme
Court;
(ii) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges
of the Federal Court;
(iii) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges
of any High Court which exercises jurisdiction in
relation to any area included in the territory of India
or which at any time before the commencement of
this Constitution exercised jurisdiction in relation to
any area included in 1[a Governor's Province of the
Dominion of India];
(e) the salary, allowances and pension payable to
or in respect of the Comptroller and Auditor-General
of India;
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for “a
Province corresponding to a State specified in Part A of the First Schedule”.

56

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 112—114.)
(f) any sums required to satisfy any judgment,
decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal;
(g) any other expenditure declared by this
Constitution or by Parliament by law to be so
charged.
Procedure in
Parliament with
respect to
estimates.

113. (1) So much of the estimates as relates to
expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India
shall not be submitted to the vote of Parliament, but
nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing
the discussion in either House of Parliament of any of
those estimates.
(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other
expenditure shall be submitted in the form of demands
for grants to the House of the People, and the House of
the People shall have power to assent, or to refuse to
assent, to any demand, or to assent to any demand subject
to a reduction of the amount specified therein.
(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on
the recommendation of the President.

Appropriation
Bills.

114. (1) As soon as may be after the grants under
article 113 have been made by the House of the People,
there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the
appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of India of
all moneys required to meet—
(a) the grants so made by the House of the People;
and
(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated
Fund of India but not exceeding in any case the
amount shown in the statement previously laid before
Parliament.
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill
in either House of Parliament which will have the effect
of varying the amount or altering the destination of any
grant so made or of varying the amount of any expenditure
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, and the
decision of the person presiding as to whether an
amendment is inadmissible under this clause shall be
final.

57

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 114—116.)
(3) Subject to the provisions of articles 115 and 116,
no money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated
Fund of India except under appropriation made by law
passed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
115. (1) The President shall—
(a) if the amount authorised by any law made in
accordance with the provisions of article 114 to be
expended for a particular service for the current
financial year is found to be insufficient for the
purposes of that year or when a need has arisen
during the current financial year for supplementary
or additional expenditure upon some new service
not contemplated in the annual financial statement
for that year, or

Supplementary,
additional or
excess grants.

(b) if any money has been spent on any service
during a financial year in excess of the amount
granted for that service and for that year,
cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament
another statement showing the estimated amount of that
expenditure or cause to be presented to the House of the
People a demand for such excess, as the case may be.
(2) The provisions of articles 112, 113 and 114 shall
have effect in relation to any such statement and
expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made
authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure or
the grant in respect of such demand as they have effect
in relation to the annual financial statement and the
expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a grant
and the law to be made for the authorisation of
appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund
of India to meet such expenditure or grant.
116. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing
provisions of this Chapter, the House of the People shall
have power—
(a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the
estimated expenditure for a part of any financial

Votes on account,
votes of credit
and exceptional
grants.

58

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 116-117.)
year pending the completion of the procedure
prescribed in article 113 for the voting of such grant
and the passing of the law in accordance with the
provisions of article 114 in relation to that
expenditure;
(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected
demand upon the resources of India when on account
of the magnitude or the indefinite character of the
service the demand cannot be stated with the details
ordinarily given in an annual financial statement;
(c) to make an exceptional grant which forms no
part of the current service of any financial year;
and Parliament shall have power to authorise by law the
withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of
India for the purposes for which the said grants are
made.
(2) The provisions of articles 113 and 114 shall have
effect in relation to the making of any grant under clause
(1) and to any law to be made under that clause as they
have effect in relation to the making of a grant with
regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual
financial statement and the law to be made for the
authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India to meet such expenditure.
Special provisions
as to financial Bills.

117. (1) A Bill or amendment making provision for
any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of
clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved
except on the recommendation of the President and a Bill
making such provision shall not be introduced in the
Council of States:
Provided that no recommendation shall be required
under this clause for the moving of an amendment making
provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make
provision for any of the matters aforesaid by reason only
that it provides for the imposition of fines or other
pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of
fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason
that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission,

59

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 117—119.)
alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority
or body for local purposes.
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into
operation, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India shall not be passed by either
House of Parliament unless the President has recommended to that House the consideration of the Bill.
Procedure Generally
118. (1) Each House of Parliament may make rules for
regulating, subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
its procedure and the conduct of its business.

Rules of
procedure.

(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules
of procedure and standing orders in force immediately
before the commencement of this Constitution with
respect to the Legislature of the Dominion of India shall
have effect in relation to Parliament subject to such
modifications and adaptations as may be made therein
by the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker
of the House of the People, as the case may be.
(3) The President, after consultation with the
Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker of the
House of the People, may make rules as to the procedure
with respect to joint sittings of, and communications
between, the two Houses.
(4) At a joint sitting of the two Houses the Speaker of
the House of the People, or in his absence such person
as may be determined by rules of procedure made under
clause (3), shall preside.
119. Parliament may, for the purpose of the timely
completion of financial business, regulate by law the
procedure of, and the conduct of business in, each House
of Parliament in relation to any financial matter or to any
Bill for the appropriation of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, and, if and so far as any
provision of any law so made is inconsistent with any
rule made by a House of Parliament under clause (1) of
article 118 or with any rule or standing order having

Regulation by law
of procedure in
Parliament in
relation to financial
business.

60

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 119—123.)
effect in relation to Parliament under clause (2) of that
article, such provision shall prevail.
Language to be
used in
Parliament.

120. (1) Notwithstanding anything in Part XVII, but
subject to the provisions of article 348, business in
Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English:
Provided that the Chairman of the Council of States
or Speaker of the House of the People, or person acting
as such, as the case may be, may permit any member who
cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or in English
to address the House in his mother-tongue.
(2) Unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, this
article shall, after the expiration of a period of fifteen
years from the commencement of this Constitution, have
effect as if the words "or in English" were omitted
therefrom.

Restriction on
discussion in
Parliament.

121. No discussion shall take place in Parliament
with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme
Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties
except upon a motion for presenting an address to the
President praying for the removal of the Judge as
hereinafter provided.

Courts not to
inquire into
proceedings of
Parliament.

122. (1) The validity of any proceedings in Parliament
shall not be called in question on the ground of any
alleged irregularity of procedure.
(2) No officer or member of Parliament in whom
powers are vested by or under this Constitution for
regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for
maintaining order, in Parliament shall be subject to the
jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him
of those powers.
CHAPTER III.—LEGISLATIVE POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT

Power of President
to promulgate
Ordinances during
recess of
Parliament.

123. (1) If at any time, except when both Houses of
Parliament are in session, the President is satisfied that
circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to
take immediate action, he may promulgate such
Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to require.

61

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 123-124.)
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall
have the same force and effect as an Act of Parliament,
but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament
and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six
weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, or, if before
the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving
it are passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the
second of those resolutions; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the President.
Explanation.—Where the Houses of Parliament are
summoned to reassemble on different dates, the period of
six weeks shall be reckoned from the later of those
dates for the purposes of this clause.
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article
makes any provision which Parliament would not under
this Constitution be competent to enact, it shall be void.
1

*

*

*

*

CHAPTER IV.—THE UNION JUDICIARY
124. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India
consisting of a Chief Justice of India and, until Parliament
by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than
seven2 other Judges.

Establishment and
constitution of
Supreme Court.

(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be
appointed by the President by warrant under his hand
and seal after consultation with such of the Judges of the
Supreme Court and of the High Courts in the States as
the President may deem necessary for the purpose and
shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five
years:
Provided that in the case of appointment of a Judge
other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of India
1
Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 2
(retrospectively) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 16 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2
Now “twenty-five”, vide the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Act,
1986 (22 of 1986), s. 2.

62

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Art. 124.)
shall always be consulted:
Provided further that—
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand
addressed to the President, resign his office;
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office in the
manner provided in clause (4).
1

[(2A) The age of a Judge of the Supreme Court shall
be determined by such authority and in such manner as
Parliament may by law provide.]
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as
a Judge of the Supreme Court unless he is a citizen of
India and—
(a) has been for at least five years a Judge of a
High Court or of two or more such Courts in
succession; or
(b) has been for at least ten years an advocate of
a High Court or of two or more such Courts in
succession; or
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, a
distinguished jurist.
Explanation I.—In this clause "High Court'' means a
High Court which exercises, or which at any time before
the commencement of this Constitution exercised,
jurisdiction in any part of the territory of India.
Explanation II.—In computing for the purpose of this
clause the period during which a person has been an
advocate, any period during which a person has held
judicial office not inferior to that of a district judge after
he became an advocate shall be included.
(4) A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed
from his office except by an order of the President
passed after an address by each House of Parliament
supported by a majority of the total membership of
that House and by a majority of not less than twothirds of the members of that House present and
1

Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 2.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

63

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 124—126.)
voting has been presented to the President in the same
session for such removal on the ground of proved
misbehaviour or incapacity.
(5) Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for
the presentation of an address and for the investigation
and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge
under clause (4).
(6) Every person appointed to be a Judge of the
Supreme Court shall, before he enters upon his office,
make and subscribe before the President, or some person
appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation
according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third
Schedule.
(7) No person who has held office as a Judge of the
Supreme Court shall plead or act in any court or before
any authority within the territory of India.
125. 1[(1) There shall be paid to the Judges of the
Supreme Court such salaries as may be determined by
Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is
so made, such salaries as are specified in the Second
Schedule.]

Salaries, etc., of
Judges.

(2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such privileges
and allowances and to such rights in respect of leave of
absence and pension as may from time to time be
determined by or under law made by Parliament and,
until so determined, to such privileges, allowances and
rights as are specified in the Second Schedule:
Provided that neither the privileges nor the
allowances of a Judge nor his rights in respect of leave
of absence or pension shall be varied to his disadvantage
after his appointment.
126. When the office of Chief Justice of India is vacant
or when the Chief Justice is, by reason of absence or
otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office,

Appointment of
acting Chief Justice.

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 2, for cl. (1) (w.e.f.
1-4-1986).

64

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 126—128.)
the duties of the office shall be performed by such one of
the other Judges of the Court as the President may appoint
for the purpose.
Appointment of
ad hoc Judges.

127. (1) If at any time there should not be a quorum
of the Judges of the Supreme Court available to hold or
continue any session of the Court, the Chief Justice of
India may, with the previous consent of the President
and after consultation with the Chief Justice of the High
Court concerned, request in writing the attendance at
the sittings of the Court, as an ad hoc Judge, for such
period as may be necessary, of a Judge of a High Court
duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme
Court to be designated by the Chief Justice of India.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Judge who has been so
designated, in priority to other duties of his office, to
attend the sittings of the Supreme Court at the time and
for the period for which his attendance is required, and
while so attending he shall have all the jurisdiction,
powers and privileges, and shall discharge the duties, of
a Judge of the Supreme Court.

Attendance of
retired Judges at
sittings of the
Supreme Court.

128. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the
Chief Justice of India may at any time, with the previous
consent of the President, request any person who has
held the office of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of the
Federal Court 1[or who has held the office of a Judge of
a High Court and is duly qualified for appointment as a
Judge of the Supreme Court] to sit and act as a Judge of
the Supreme Court, and every such person so requested
shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such
allowances as the President may by order determine and
have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, but
shall not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of that
Court:
Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed
to require any such person as aforesaid to sit and act as
a Judge of that Court unless he consents so to do.

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 3.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

65

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 129—132.)
129. The Supreme Court shall be a court of record
and shall have all the powers of such a court including
the power to punish for contempt of itself.

Supreme Court to
be a court of
record.

130. The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or in such
other place or places, as the Chief Justice of India may,
with the approval of the President, from time to time,
appoint.

Seat of Supreme
Court.

131. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
Supreme Court shall, to the exclusion of any other court,
have original jurisdiction in any dispute—

Original
jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court.

(a) between the Government of India and one or
more States; or
(b) between the Government of India and any
State or States on one side and one or more other
States on the other; or
(c) between two or more States,
if and in so far as the dispute involves any question
(whether of law or fact) on which the existence or extent
of a legal right depends:
1
[Provided that the said jurisdiction shall not extend
to a dispute arising out of any treaty, agreement, covenant,
engagement, sanad or other similar instrument which,
having been entered into or executed before the
commencement of this Constitution, continues in operation
after such commencement, or which provides that the
said jurisdiction shall not extend to such a dispute.]
2

131A. [Exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in
regard to questions as to constitutional validity of Central
laws.] Rep. by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act,
1977, s. 4 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
132. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court
from any judgment, decree or final order of a High Court
in the territory of India, whether in a civil, criminal or

1
2

Appellate
jurisdiction of
Supreme Court in
appeals from High
Courts in certain
cases.

Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 5, for the proviso.
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).

66

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 132-133.)
other proceeding, 1[if the High Court certifies under article
134A] that the case involves a substantial question of
law as to the interpretation of this Constitution.
2

*

*

*

*

(3) Where such a certificate is given, 3*** any party in
the case may appeal to the Supreme Court on the ground
that any such question as aforesaid has been wrongly
decided 3***.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, the
expression “final order” includes an order deciding an
issue which, if decided in favour of the appellant, would
be sufficient for the final disposal of the case.
Appellate
jurisdiction of
Supreme Court in
appeals from High
Courts in regard to
civil matters.

133. 4[(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court
from any judgment, decree or final order in a civil
proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India 5[if
the High Court certifies under article 134A—]
(a) that the case involves a substantial question of
law of general importance; and
(b) that in the opinion of the High Court the said
question needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.]
(2) Notwithstanding anything in article 132, any party
appealing to the Supreme Court under clause (1) may
urge as one of the grounds in such appeal that a
substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this
Constitution has been wrongly decided.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, no
appeal shall, unless Parliament by law otherwise
provides, lie to the Supreme Court from the judgment,
decree or final order of one Judge of a High Court.

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 17, for “if the High
Court certifies” (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
2
Cl. (2) omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
3
Certain words omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
4
Subs. by the Constitution (Thirtieth Amendment) Act, 1972, s. 2, for cl. (1) (w.e.f.
27-2-1973).
5
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 18, for “if the High
Court certifies—” (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

67

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 134-134A.)
134. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court
from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal
proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India if
the High Court—

Appellate
jurisdiction of
Supreme Court in
regard to criminal
matters.

(a) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of
an accused person and sentenced him to death; or
(b) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case
from any court subordinate to its authority and has
in such trial convicted the accused person and
sentenced him to death; or
(c) 1[certifies under article 134A] that the case is a
fit one for appeal to the Supreme Court:
Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) shall
lie subject to such provisions as may be made in that
behalf under clause (1) of article 145 and to such
conditions as the High Court may establish or require.
(2) Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme
Court any further powers to entertain and hear appeals
from any judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal
proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India
subject to such conditions and limitations as may be
specified in such law.
2
[134A. Every High Court, passing or making a
judgment, decree, final order, or sentence, referred to in
clause (1) of article 132 or clause (1) of article 133, or
clause (1) of article 134,—

Certificate for
appeal to the
Supreme Court.

(a) may, if it deems fit so to do, on its own motion;
and
(b) shall, if an oral application is made, by or on
behalf of the party aggrieved, immediately after the
passing or making of such judgment, decree, final
order or sentence,
determine, as soon as may be after such passing or
making, the question whether a certificate of the nature

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 19, for “certifies”
(w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
2
Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).

68

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 134A—139.)
referred to in clause (1) of article 132, or clause (1) of
article 133 or, as the case may be, sub-clause (c) of clause
(1) of article 134, may be given in respect of that case.]
Jurisdiction and
powers of the
Federal Court
under existing law
to be exercisable by
the Supreme Court.

135. Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the
Supreme Court shall also have jurisdiction and powers
with respect to any matter to which the provisions of
article 133 or article 134 do not apply if jurisdiction and
powers in relation to that matter were exercisable by the
Federal Court immediately before the commencement of
this Constitution under any existing law.

Special leave to
appeal by the
Supreme Court.

136. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter,
the Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special
leave to appeal from any judgment, decree, determination,
sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made
by any court or tribunal in the territory of India.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to any judgment,
determination, sentence or order passed or made by any
court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating
to the Armed Forces.

Review of
judgments or
orders by the
Supreme Court.

137. Subject to the provisions of any law made by
Parliament or any rules made under article 145, the
Supreme Court shall have power to review any judgment
pronounced or order made by it.

Enlargement of
the jurisdiction of
the Supreme
Court.

138. (1) The Supreme Court shall have such further
jurisdiction and powers with respect to any of the matters
in the Union List as Parliament may by law confer.
(2) The Supreme Court shall have such further
jurisdiction and powers with respect to any matter as the
Government of India and the Government of any State
may by special agreement confer, if Parliament by law
provides for the exercise of such jurisdiction and powers
by the Supreme Court.

Conferment on
the Supreme
Court of powers
to issue certain
writs.

139. Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme
Court power to issue directions, orders or writs, including
writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition,
quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for any
purposes other than those mentioned in clause (2) of
article 32.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

69

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 139A—142.)
1

[139A. 2[(1) Where cases involving the same or
substantially the same questions of law are pending
before the Supreme Court and one or more High Courts
or before two or more High Courts and the Supreme
Court is satisfied on its own motion or on an application
made by the Attorney-General of India or by a party to
any such case that such questions are substantial
questions of general importance, the Supreme Court may
withdraw the case or cases pending before the High Court
or the High Courts and dispose of all the cases itself:

Transfer of certain
cases.

Provided that the Supreme Court may after
determining the said questions of law return any case so
withdrawn together with a copy of its judgment on such
questions to the High Court from which the case has
been withdrawn, and the High Court shall on receipt
thereof, proceed to dispose of the case in conformity
with such judgment.]
(2) The Supreme Court may, if it deems it expedient
so to do for the ends of justice, transfer any case, appeal
or other proceedings pending before any High Court to
any other High Court.]
140. Parliament may by law make provision for
conferring upon the Supreme Court such supplemental
powers not inconsistent with any of the provisions of
this Constitution as may appear to be necessary or
desirable for the purpose of enabling the Court more
effectively to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by
or under this Constitution.

Ancillary powers of
Supreme Court.

141. The law declared by the Supreme Court shall be
binding on all courts within the territory of India.

Law declared by
Supreme Court to be
binding on all courts.

142. (1) The Supreme Court in the exercise of its
jurisdiction may pass such decree or make such order as
is necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or
matter pending before it, and any decree so passed or

Enforcement of
decrees and orders
of Supreme Court
and orders as to
discovery, etc.

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 21, for cl. (1) (w.e.f.
1-8-1979).
2

70

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 142—144A.)
order so made shall be enforceable throughout the
territory of India in such manner as may be prescribed
by or under any law made by Parliament and, until
provision in that behalf is so made, in such manner as
the President may by order1 prescribe.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this
behalf by Parliament, the Supreme Court shall, as respects
the whole of the territory of India, have all and every
power to make any order for the purpose of securing the
attendance of any person, the discovery or production of
any documents, or the investigation or punishment of
any contempt of itself.
Power of President
to consult Supreme
Court.

143. (1) If at any time it appears to the President that
a question of law or fact has arisen, or is likely to arise,
which is of such a nature and of such public importance
that it is expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme
Court upon it, he may refer the question to that Court for
consideration and the Court may, after such hearing as it
thinks fit, report to the President its opinion thereon.
(2) The President may, notwithstanding anything in
*** the proviso to article 131, refer a dispute of the kind
mentioned in the 3[said proviso] to the Supreme Court
for opinion and the Supreme Court shall, after such
hearing as it thinks fit, report to the President its opinion
thereon.
2

Civil and judicial
authorities to act in
aid of the Supreme
Court.

144. All authorities, civil and judicial, in the territory
of India shall act in aid of the Supreme Court.

4
144A. [Special provisions as to disposal of questions
relating to constitutional validity of laws.] Rep. by the
Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 5
(w.e.f. 13-4-1978).

1

See the Supreme Court (Decrees and Orders) Enforcement Order, 1954 (C. O. 47).
The words , brackets and figures “clause (i) of” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
3
Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for “said clause”.
4
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 25 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

71

(Part V.—The Union.—Art. 145.)
145. (1) Subject to the provisions of any law made by
Parliament, the Supreme Court may from time to time,
with the approval of the President, make rules for
regulating generally the practice and procedure of the
Court including—

Rules of Court, etc.

(a) rules as to the persons practising before the
Court;
(b) rules as to the procedure for hearing appeals
and other matters pertaining to appeals including
the time within which appeals to the Court are to be
entered;
(c) rules as to the proceedings in the Court for the
enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III;
1
[(cc) rules as to the proceedings in the Court
under 2[article 139A];]

(d) rules as to the entertainment of appeals under
sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of article 134;
(e) rules as to the conditions subject to which any
judgment pronounced or order made by the Court
may be reviewed and the procedure for such review
including the time within which applications to the
Court for such review are to be entered;
(f) rules as to the costs of and incidental to any
proceedings in the Court and as to the fees to be
charged in respect of proceedings therein;
(g) rules as to the granting of bail;
(h) rules as to stay of proceedings;
(i) rules providing for the summary determination
of any appeal which appears to the Court to be
frivolous or vexatious or brought for the purpose of
delay;
(j) rules as to the procedure for inquiries referred
to in clause (1) of article 317.
1

Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 6, for “articles 131A
and 139A” (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
2

72

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 145-146.)
(2) Subject to the 1[provisions of 2*** clause (3)], rules
made under this article may fix the minimum number of
Judges who are to sit for any purpose, and may provide
for the powers of single Judges and Division Courts.
(3) 3[2*** The minimum number] of Judges who are to
sit for the purpose of deciding any case involving a
substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this
Constitution or for the purpose of hearing any reference
under article 143 shall be five:
Provided that, where the Court hearing an appeal
under any of the provisions of this Chapter other than
article 132 consists of less than five Judges and in the
course of the hearing of the appeal the Court is satisfied
that the appeal involves a substantial question of law as
to the interpretation of this Constitution the determination
of which is necessary for the disposal of the appeal, such
Court shall refer the question for opinion to a Court
constituted as required by this clause for the purpose of
deciding any case involving such a question and shall
on receipt of the opinion dispose of the appeal in
conformity with such opinion.
(4) No judgment shall be delivered by the Supreme
Court save in open Court, and no report shall be made
under article 143 save in accordance with an opinion
also delivered in open Court.
(5) No judgment and no such opinion shall be
delivered by the Supreme Court save with the
concurrence of a majority of the Judges present at the
hearing of the case, but nothing in this clause shall be
deemed to prevent a Judge who does not concur from
delivering a dissenting judgment or opinion.
Officers and
servants and the
expenses of the
Supreme Court.

146. (1) Appointments of officers and servants of the
Supreme Court shall be made by the Chief Justice of
India or such other Judge or officer of the Court as he
may direct:

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26, for “provisions
of clause (3)” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2
Certain words omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 6
(w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26, for “The minimum
number” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).

73

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 146—148.)
Provided that the President may by rule require that
in such cases as may be specified in the rule, no person
not already attached to the Court shall be appointed to
any office connected with the Court, save after
consultation with the Union Public Service Commission.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by
Parliament, the conditions of service of officers and
servants of the Supreme Court shall be such as may be
prescribed by rules made by the Chief Justice of India or
by some other Judge or officer of the Court authorised
by the Chief Justice of India to make rules for the
purpose:
Provided that the rules made under this clause shall,
so far as they relate to salaries, allowances, leave or
pensions, require the approval of the President.
(3) The administrative expenses of the Supreme Court,
including all salaries, allowances and pensions
payable to or in respect of the officers and servants of
the Court, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund
of India, and any fees or other moneys taken by the
Court shall form part of that Fund.
147. In this Chapter and in Chapter V of Part VI,
references to any substantial question of law as to the
interpretation of this Constitution shall be construed as
including references to any substantial question of law
as to the interpretation of the Government of India Act,
1935 (including any enactment amending or
supplementing that Act), or of any Order in Council or
order made thereunder, or of the Indian Independence
Act, 1947, or of any order made thereunder.

Interpretation.

CHAPTER V.—COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR-GENERAL OF
INDIA
148. (1) There shall be a Comptroller and AuditorGeneral of India who shall be appointed by the President
by warrant under his hand and seal and shall only be
removed from office in like manner and on the like
grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court.

Comptroller and
Auditor-General
of India.

74

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 148-149.)
(2) Every person appointed to be the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India shall, before he enters upon
his office, make and subscribe before the President, or
some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose
in the Third Schedule.
(3) The salary and other conditions of service of the
Comptroller and Auditor-General shall be such as may
be determined by Parliament by law and, until they are
so determined, shall be as specified in the Second
Schedule:
Provided that neither the salary of a Comptroller and
Auditor-General nor his rights in respect of leave of
absence, pension or age of retirement shall be varied to
his disadvantage after his appointment.
(4) The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall not
be eligible for further office either under the Government
of India or under the Government of any State after he
has ceased to hold his office.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and
of any law made by Parliament, the conditions of service
of persons serving in the Indian Audit and Accounts
Department and the administrative powers of the
Comptroller and Auditor-General shall be such as may
be prescribed by rules made by the President after
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(6) The administrative expenses of the office of the
Comptroller and Auditor-General, including all salaries,
allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the
persons serving in that office, shall be charged upon the
Consolidated Fund of India.
Duties and
powers of the
Comptroller and
Auditor-General.

149. The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall
perform such duties and exercise such powers in relation
to the accounts of the Union and of the States and of any
other authority or body as may be prescribed by or under
any law made by Parliament and, until provision in that
behalf is so made, shall perform such duties and exercise
such powers in relation to the accounts of the Union and

75

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part V.—The Union.—Arts. 149—151.)
of the States as were conferred on or exercisable by the
Auditor-General of India immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution in relation to the
accounts of the Dominion of India and of the Provinces
respectively.
1
[150. The accounts of the Union and of the States
shall be kept in such form as the President may, 2[on the
advice of] the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India,
prescribe.]

Form of accounts
of the Union and
of the States.

151. (1) The reports of the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral of India relating to the accounts of the Union
shall be submitted to the President, who shall cause them
to be laid before each House of Parliament.

Audit reports.

(2) The reports of the Comptroller and AuditorGeneral of India relating to the accounts of a State shall
be submitted to the Governor 3*** of the State, who shall
cause them to be laid before the Legislature of the State.

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 27, for art. 150
(w.e.f. 1-4-1977).
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 22, for “after
consultation with” (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.

PART VI
THE STATES 1***
CHAPTER I.—GENERAL
Definition.

152. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,
the expression “State” 2[does not include the State of
Jammu and Kashmir].
CHAPTER II.—THE EXECUTIVE
The Governor

Governors of
States.

153. There shall be a Governor for each State:
3

[Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent
the appointment of the same person as Governor for two
or more States.]
Executive power
of State.

154. (1) The executive power of the State shall be
vested in the Governor and shall be exercised by him
either directly or through officers subordinate to him in
accordance with this Constitution.
(2) Nothing in this article shall—
(a) be deemed to transfer to the Governor any
functions conferred by any existing law on any other
authority; or
(b) prevent Parliament or the Legislature of the
State from conferring by law functions on any
authority subordinate to the Governor.

Appointment of
Governor.

155. The Governor of a State shall be appointed by
the President by warrant under his hand and seal.

Term of office of
Governor.

156. (1) The Governor shall hold office during the
pleasure of the President.

1
The words “IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE” omitted by the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2
Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for “means a State specified in Part A of the First
Schedule”.
3
Added by s. 6, ibid.

76

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

77

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 156—159.)
(2) The Governor may, by writing under his hand
addressed to the President, resign his office.
(3) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this article,
a Governor shall hold office for a term of five years from
the date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that a Governor shall, notwithstanding the
expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his
successor enters upon his office.
157. No person shall be eligible for appointment as
Governor unless he is a citizen of India and has
completed the age of thirty-five years.

Qualifications for
appointment as
Governor.

158. (1) The Governor shall not be a member of either
House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of
any State specified in the First Schedule, and if a member
of either House of Parliament or of a House of the
Legislature of any such State be appointed Governor, he
shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that House
on the date on which he enters upon his office as
Governor.

Conditions of
Governor's office.

(2) The Governor shall not hold any other office of
profit.
(3) The Governor shall be entitled without payment
of rent to the use of his official residences and shall be
also entitled to such emoluments, allowances and
privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law
and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such
emoluments, allowances and privileges as are specified
in the Second Schedule.
1
[(3A) Where the same person is appointed as
Governor of two or more States, the emoluments and
allowances payable to the Governor shall be allocated
among the States in such proportion as the President
may by order determine.]

(4) The emoluments and allowances of the Governor
shall not be diminished during his term of office.
159. Every Governor and every person discharging
the functions of the Governor shall, before entering upon
his office, make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief
Justice of the High Court exercising jurisdiction in
relation to the State, or, in his absence, the seniormost
1

Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 7.

Oath or affirmation
by the Governor.

78

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 159—163.)
Judge of that Court available, an oath or affirmation in
the following form, that is to say—
“I, A. B., do swear in the name of God that I will faithfully
solemnly affirm

execute the office of Governor (or discharge the functions
of the Governor) of .............(name of the State) and will to
the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the
Constitution and the law and that I will devote myself to
the service and well-being of the people of ..………(name
of the State).”
Discharge of the
functions of the
Governor in certain
contingencies.

160. The President may make such provision as he
thinks fit for the discharge of the functions of the
Governor of a State in any contingency not provided for
in this Chapter.

Power of Governor
to grant pardons,
etc., and to
suspend, remit or
commute sentences
in certain cases.

161. The Governor of a State shall have the power to
grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of
punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence
of any person convicted of any offence against any law
relating to a matter to which the executive power of the
State extends.

Extent of executive
power of State.

162. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
executive power of a State shall extend to the matters
with respect to which the Legislature of the State has
power to make laws:
Provided that in any matter with respect to which
the Legislature of a State and Parliament have power to
make laws, the executive power of the State shall be
subject to, and limited by, the executive power expressly
conferred by this Constitution or by any law made by
Parliament upon the Union or authorities thereof.
Council of Ministers

Council of
Ministers to aid
and advise
Governor.

163. (1) There shall be a Council of Ministers with the
Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the Governor
in the exercise of his functions, except in so far as he is
by or under this Constitution required to exercise his
functions or any of them in his discretion.
(2) If any question arises whether any matter is or is
not a matter as respects which the Governor is by or
under this Constitution required to act in his discretion,
the decision of the Governor in his discretion shall be
final, and the validity of anything done by the Governor
shall not be called in question on the ground that he
ought or ought not to have acted in his discretion.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

79

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 163-164.)
(3) The question whether any, and if so what, advice
was tendered by Ministers to the Governor shall not be
inquired into in any court.
164. (1) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the
Governor and the other Ministers shall be appointed by
the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and the
Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the
Governor:
Provided that in the States of 1 [Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand], Madhya Pradesh and Orissa, there shall be
a Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may in addition
be in charge of the welfare of the Scheduled Castes and
backward classes or any other work.
2
[(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the
Chief Minister, in the Council of Ministers in a State shall
not exceed fifteen per cent. of the total number of
members of the Legislative Assembly of that State:
Provided that the number of Ministers, including the
Chief Minister in a State shall not be less than twelve:
Provided further that where the total number of
Ministers including the Chief Minister in the Council of
Ministers in any State at the commencement of the
Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003 exceeds
the said fifteen per cent. or the number specified in the
first proviso, as the case may be, then the total number of
Ministers in that State shall be brought in conformity
with the provisions of this clause within six months from
such date* as the President may by public notification
appoint.

Other provisions
as to Ministers.

(1B) A member of the Legislative Assembly of a State
or either House of the Legislature of a State having
Legislative Council belonging to any political party who
is disqualified for being a member of that House under
paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall also be
disqualified to be appointed as a Minister under clause
(1) for duration of the period commencing from the date
of his disqualification till the date on which the term of
his office as such member would expire or where he
contests any election to the Legislative Assembly of a
State or either House of the Legislature of a State having
Legislative Council, as the case may be, before the expiry
of such period, till the date on which he is declared
elected, whichever is earlier.]
1

Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-fourth Amendment) Act, 2006, s. 2, for “Bihar”.
Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3.
*7-1-2004, vide S.O. 21(E), dated 7-1-2004.
2

80

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 164—166.)
(2) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively
responsible to the Legislative Assembly of the State.
(3) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the
Governor shall administer to him the oaths of office and
of secrecy according to the forms set out for the purpose
in the Third Schedule.
(4) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive
months is not a member of the Legislature of the State
shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.
(5) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be
such as the Legislature of the State may from time to time
by law determine and, until the Legislature of the State
so determines, shall be as specified in the Second
Schedule.
The Advocate-General for the State
Advocate-General
for the State.

165. (1) The Governor of each State shall appoint a
person who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of a
High Court to be Advocate-General for the State.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Advocate-General to
give advice to the Government of the State upon such
legal matters, and to perform such other duties of a legal
character, as may from time to time be referred or
assigned to him by the Governor, and to discharge the
functions conferred on him by or under this Constitution
or any other law for the time being in force.
(3) The Advocate-General shall hold office during
the pleasure of the Governor, and shall receive such
remuneration as the Governor may determine.
Conduct of Government Business

Conduct of
business of the
Government of a
State.

166. (1) All executive action of the Government of a
State shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the
Governor.
(2) Orders and other instruments made and executed
in the name of the Governor shall be authenticated in
such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by
the Governor, and the validity of an order or instrument
which is so authenticated shall not be called in question
on the ground that it is not an order or instrument made
or executed by the Governor.

81

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 166—168.)
(3) The Governor shall make rules for the more
convenient transaction of the business of the Government
of the State, and for the allocation among Ministers of
the said business in so far as it is not business with
respect to which the Governor is by or under this
Constitution required to act in his discretion.
1
*
*
*
*
*
167. It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister of each
State—
(a) to communicate to the Governor of the State
all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to
the administration of the affairs of the State and
proposals for legislation;
(b) to furnish such information relating to the
administration of the affairs of the State and
proposals for legislation as the Governor may call
for; and
(c) if the Governor so requires, to submit for the
consideration of the Council of Ministers any matter
on which a decision has been taken by a Minister
but which has not been considered by the Council.
CHAPTER III.—THE STATE LEGISLATURE
General
168. (1) For every State there shall be a Legislature
which shall consist of the Governor, and—
(a) in the States of 2[Andhra Pradesh,] Bihar, 3***
4
[Madhya Pradesh], 5*** 6[Maharashtra], 7[Karnataka], 8***
9
[and Uttar Pradesh], two Houses;

Duties of Chief
Minister as
respects the
furnishing of
information to
Governor, etc.

Constitution of
Legislatures in
States.

(b) in other States, one House.
1
Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 28 (w.e.f.
3-1-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 23
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2
Ins. by the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Act, 2005 (1 of 2006), s. 3 (w.e.f.
30-3-2007).
3
The word “Bombay” omitted by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960),
s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
4
No date has been appointed under s. 8(2) of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, for the insertion of the words “Madhya Pradesh” in this sub-clause.
5
The words “Tamil Nadu,” omitted by Tamil Nadu Legislative Council (Abolition) Act,
1986 (40 of 1986), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-11-1986).
6
Ins. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
7
Subs. by the Mysore State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973 (31 of 1973), s. 4, for
“Mysore” (w.e.f 1-11-1973), which was inserted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 8(1).
8
The word “Punjab,” omitted by the Punjab Legislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1969
(46 of 1969), s. 4 (w.e.f. 7-1-1970).
9
Subs. by the West Bengal Legislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1969 (20 of 1969), s. 4, for
“Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal“ (w.e.f. 1-8-1969).

82

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 168—170.)
(2) Where there are two Houses of the Legislature of
a State, one shall be known as the Legislative Council
and the other as the Legislative Assembly, and where
there is only one House, it shall be known as the
Legislative Assembly.
Abolition or
creation of
Legislative
Councils in
States.

169. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 168,
Parliament may by law provide for the abolition of the
Legislative Council of a State having such a Council or
for the creation of such a Council in a State having no
such Council, if the Legislative Assembly of the State
passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the total
membership of the Assembly and by a majority of not
less than two-thirds of the members of the Assembly
present and voting.
(2) Any law referred to in clause (1) shall contain
such provisions for the amendment of this Constitution
as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of
the law and may also contain such supplemental,
incidental and consequential provisions as Parliament
may deem necessary.
(3) No such law as aforesaid shall be deemed to be
an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of
article 368.

Composition of
the Legislative
Assemblies.

1

[170. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 333, the
Legislative Assembly of each State shall consist of not
more than five hundred, and not less than sixty, members
chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in
the State.
(2) For the purposes of clause (1), each State shall be
divided into territorial constituencies in such manner
that the ratio between the population of each constituency
and the number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as
practicable, be the same throughout the State.
2
[Explanation.—In this clause, the expression
“population” means the population as ascertained at the
last preceding census of which the relevant figures have
been published:

1

Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 9, for art. 170.
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976 , s. 29, for the Explanation
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2

83

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 170-171.)
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the
last preceding census of which the relevant figures have
been published shall, until the relevant figures for the
first census taken after the year 1[2026] have been
published, be construed as a reference to the 2[2001]
census.]
(3) Upon the completion of each census, the total
number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State
and the division of each State into territorial
constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and
in such manner as Parliament may by law determine:
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect
representation in the Legislative Assembly until the
dissolution of the then existing Assembly:]
3

[Provided further that such readjustment shall take
effect from such date as the President may, by order,
specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any
election to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the
basis of the territorial constituencies existing before such
readjustment:
Provided also that until the relevant figures for the
first census taken after the year 1[2026] have been
published, it shall not be necessary to 4[readjust—
(i) the total number of seats in the Legislative
Assembly of each State as readjusted on the basis of
the 1971 census; and
(ii) the division of such State into territorial
constituencies as may be readjusted on the basis of
the 2[2001] census,
under this clause.]
171. (1) The total number of members in the
Legislative Council of a State having such a Council
shall not exceed 5[one-third] of the total number of
members in the Legislative Assembly of that State:

Composition of
the Legislative
Councils.

Provided that the total number of members in the
Legislative Council of a State shall in no case be less
than forty.
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 5, for “2000” and
“1971” respectively.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 4, for “1991”.
3
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 29 (w.e.f.
3-1-1977).
4
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 5, for certain words.
5
Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 10, for “one-fourth”.

84

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Art. 171.)
(2) Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the
composition of the Legislative Council of a State shall be
as provided in clause (3).
(3) Of the total number of members of the Legislative
Council of a State—
(a) as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected
by electorates consisting of members of
municipalities, district boards and such other local
authorities in the State as Parliament may by law
specify;
(b) as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be elected
by electorates consisting of persons residing in the
State who have been for at least three years graduates
of any university in the territory of India or have
been for at least three years in possession of
qualifications prescribed by or under any law made
by Parliament as equivalent to that of a graduate of
any such university;
(c) as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be elected
by electorates consisting of persons who have been
for at least three years engaged in teaching in such
educational institutions within the State, not lower
in standard than that of a secondary school, as may
be prescribed by or under any law made by
Parliament;
(d) as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected
by the members of the Legislative Assembly of the
State from amongst persons who are not members of
the Assembly;
(e) the remainder shall be nominated by the
Governor in accordance with the provisions of
clause (5).
(4) The members to be elected under sub-clauses (a),
(b) and (c) of clause (3) shall be chosen in such territorial
constituencies as may be prescribed by or under any law
made by Parliament, and the elections under the said
sub-clauses and under sub-clause (d) of the said clause
shall be held in accordance with the system of
proportional representation by means of the single
transferable vote.
(5) The members to be nominated by the Governor
under sub-clause (e) of clause (3) shall consist of persons

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

85

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 171—173.)
having special knowledge or practical experience in
respect of such matters as the following, namely:—
Literature, science, art, co-operative movement and
social service.
172. (1) Every Legislative Assembly of every State,
unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for 1[five years]
from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer
and the expiration of the said period of 1[five years] shall
operate as a dissolution of the Assembly:

Duration of State
Legislatures.

Provided that the said period may, while a
Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, be extended
by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one year
at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period
of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.
(2) The Legislative Council of a State shall not be
subject to dissolution, but as nearly as possible one-third
of the members thereof shall retire as soon as may be on
the expiration of every second year in accordance with
the provisions made in that behalf by Parliament by law.
173. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to
fill a seat in the Legislature of a State unless he—

Qualification for
membership of the
State Legislature.

2

[(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes
before some person authorised in that behalf by the
Election Commission an oath or affirmation
according to the form set out for the purpose in the
Third Schedule;]
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Legislative
Assembly, not less than twenty-five years of age and,
in the case of a seat in the Legislative Council, not
less than thirty years of age; and
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be
prescribed in that behalf by or under any law made
by Parliament.
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 24, for “six years”
(w.e.f. 6-9-1979). The words “six years” were subs. for the original words “five years” by the
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 30 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 4, for cl. (a).

86

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 174—177.)
Sessions of the
State Legislature,
prorogation and
dissolution.

1

[174. (1) The Governor shall from time to time
summon the House or each House of the Legislature of
the State to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit,
but six months shall not intervene between its last sitting
in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting
in the next session.
(2) The Governor may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the House or either House;
(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.]

Right of Governor
to address and
send messages to
the House or
Houses.

175. (1) The Governor may address the Legislative
Assembly or, in the case of a State having a Legislative
Council, either House of the Legislature of the State, or
both Houses assembled together, and may for that purpose
require the attendance of members.
(2) The Governor may send messages to the House or
Houses of the Legislature of the State, whether with
respect to a Bill then pending in the Legislature or
otherwise, and a House to which any message is so sent
shall with all convenient despatch consider any matter
required by the message to be taken into consideration.

Special address
by the Governor.

176. (1) At the commencement of 2[the first session
after each general election to the Legislative Assembly
and at the commencement of the first session of each
year], the Governor shall address the Legislative
Assembly or, in the case of a State having a Legislative
Council, both Houses assembled together and inform the
Legislature of the causes of its summons.
(2) Provision shall be made by the rules regulating
the procedure of the House or either House for the
allotment of time for discussion of the matters referred
to in such address 3***.

Rights of Ministers
and AdvocateGeneral as respects
the Houses.

1

177. Every Minister and the Advocate-General for a
State shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to
take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly
of the State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative

Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 8, for art. 174.
Subs. by s. 9, ibid. for “every session”.
3
The words “and for the precedence of such discussion over other business of the House”
omitted by s. 9, ibid.
2

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

87

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 177—180.)
Council, both Houses, and to speak in, and otherwise to
take part in the proceedings of, any committee of the
Legislature of which he may be named a member, but
shall not, by virtue of this article, be entitled to vote.
Officers of the State Legislature
178. Every Legislative Assembly of a State shall, as
soon as may be, choose two members of the Assembly
to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof
and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker
becomes vacant, the Assembly shall choose another
member to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case
may be.

The Speaker and
Deputy Speaker
of the Legislative
Assembly.

179. A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy
Speaker of an Assembly—

Vacation and
resignation of,
and removal
from, the offices
of Speaker and
Deputy Speaker.

(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a
member of the Assembly;
(b) may at any time by writing under his hand
addressed, if such member is the Speaker, to the
Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy
Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution
of the Assembly passed by a majority of all the then
members of the Assembly:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c)
shall be moved unless at least fourteen days' notice has
been given of the intention to move the resolution:
Provided further that, whenever the Assembly is
dissolved, the Speaker shall not vacate his office until
immediately before the first meeting of the Assembly after
the dissolution.
180. (1) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the
duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy
Speaker or, if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant,
by such member of the Assembly as the Governor may
appoint for the purpose.

Power of the
Deputy Speaker
or other person to
perform the
duties of the
office of, or to
act as, Speaker.

88

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 180—183.)
(2) During the absence of the Speaker from any
sitting of the Assembly the Deputy Speaker or, if he is
also absent, such person as may be determined by the
rules of procedure of the Assembly, or, if no such person
is present, such other person as may be determined by
the Assembly, shall act as Speaker.
The Speaker or
the Deputy
Speaker not to
preside while a
resolution for his
removal from
office is under
consideration.

181. (1) At any sitting of the Legislative Assembly,
while any resolution for the removal of the Speaker from
his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while
any resolution for the removal of the Deputy Speaker,
from his office is under consideration, the Deputy Speaker,
shall not, though he is present, preside, and the provisions
of clause (2) of article 180 shall apply in relation to every
such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from
which the Speaker or, as the case may be, the Deputy
Speaker, is absent.
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and
otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the
Legislative Assembly while any resolution for his removal
from office is under consideration in the Assembly and
shall, notwithstanding anything in article 189, be entitled
to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on
any other matter during such proceedings but not in the
case of an equality of votes.

The Chairman and
Deputy Chairman
of the Legislative
Council.

182. The Legislative Council of every State having
such Council shall, as soon as may be, choose two
members of the Council to be respectively Chairman and
Deputy Chairman thereof and, so often as the office of
Chairman or Deputy Chairman becomes vacant, the
Council shall choose another member to be Chairman or
Deputy Chairman, as the case may be.

Vacation and
resignation of, and
removal from, the
offices of Chairman
and Deputy
Chairman.

183. A member holding office as Chairman or Deputy
Chairman of a Legislative Council—
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a
member of the Council;
(b) may at any time by writing under his hand
addressed, if such member is the Chairman, to the

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

89

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 183—185.)
Deputy Chairman, and if such member is the Deputy
Chairman, to the Chairman, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution
of the Council passed by a majority of all the then
members of the Council:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c)
shall be moved unless at least fourteen days' notice has
been given of the intention to move the resolution.
184. (1) While the office of Chairman is vacant, the
duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy
Chairman or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is also
vacant, by such member of the Council as the Governor
may appoint for the purpose.

Power of the
Deputy Chairman
or other person to
perform the duties
of the office of, or
to act as,
Chairman.

(2) During the absence of the Chairman from any
sitting of the Council the Deputy Chairman or, if he is
also absent, such person as may be determined by the
rules of procedure of the Council, or, if no such person
is present, such other person as may be determined by
the Council, shall act as Chairman.
185. (1) At any sitting of the Legislative Council,
while any resolution for the removal of the Chairman
from his office is under consideration, the Chairman, or
while any resolution for the removal of the Deputy
Chairman from his office is under consideration, the
Deputy Chairman, shall not, though he is present,
preside, and the provisions of clause (2) of article 184
shall apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply
in relation to a sitting from which the Chairman or, as
the case may be, the Deputy Chairman is absent.
(2) The Chairman shall have the right to speak in,
and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the
Legislative Council while any resolution for his removal
from office is under consideration in the Council and
shall, notwithstanding anything in article 189, be entitled
to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on
any other matter during such proceedings but not in the
case of an equality of votes.

The Chairman or
the Deputy
Chairman not to
preside while a
resolution for his
removal from office
is under
consideration.

90

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 186—189.)
Salaries and
allowances of the
Speaker and
Deputy Speaker
and the Chairman
and Deputy
Chairman.

186. There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, and to the Chairman
and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council,
such salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed
by the Legislature of the State by law and, until provision
in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances
as are specified in the Second Schedule.

Secretariat of
State Legislature.

187. (1) The House or each House of the Legislature
of a State shall have a separate secretarial staff:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall, in the case
of the Legislature of a State having a Legislative Council,
be construed as preventing the creation of posts common
to both Houses of such Legislature.
(2) The Legislature of a State may by law regulate the
recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons
appointed, to the secretarial staff of the House or Houses
of the Legislature of the State.
(3) Until provision is made by the Legislature of the
State under clause (2), the Governor may, after
consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
or the Chairman of the Legislative Council, as the case
may be, make rules regulating the recruitment, and the
conditions of service of persons appointed, to the
secretarial staff of the Assembly or the Council, and any
rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions
of any law made under the said clause.
Conduct of Business

Oath or affirmation
by members.

188. Every member of the Legislative Assembly or the
Legislative Council of a State shall, before taking his seat,
make and subscribe before the Governor, or some person
appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation
according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third
Schedule.

Voting in Houses,
power of Houses
to act
notwithstanding
vacancies and
quorum.

189. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this
Constitution, all questions at any sitting of a House of
the Legislature of a State shall be determined by a
majority of votes of the members present and voting,
other than the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as
such.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

91

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 189—190.)
The Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such,
shall not vote in the first instance, but shall have and
exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.
(2) A House of the Legislature of a State shall have
power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the
membership thereof, and any proceedings in the
Legislature of a State shall be valid notwithstanding that
it is discovered subsequently that some person who was
not entitled so to do sat or voted or otherwise took part
in the proceedings.
(3) Until the Legislature of the State by law otherwise
provides, the quorum to constitute a meeting of a House
of the Legislature of a State shall be ten members or onetenth of the total number of members of the House,
whichever is greater.
(4) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative
Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State there is no
quorum, it shall be the duty of the Speaker or Chairman,
or person acting as such, either to adjourn the House or
to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.
Disqualifications of Members
190. (1) No person shall be a member of both Houses
of the Legislature of a State and provision shall be made
by the Legislature of the State by law for the vacation by
a person who is chosen a member of both Houses of his
seat in one house or the other.

Vacation of seats.

(2) No person shall be a member of the Legislatures
of two or more States specified in the First Schedule and
if a person is chosen a member of the Legislatures of
two or more such States, then, at the expiration of such
period as may be specified in rules 1 made by the
President, that person's seat in the Legislatures of all
such States shall become vacant, unless he has previously
resigned his seat in the Legislatures of all but one of the
States.
(3) If a member of a House of the Legislature of a
State—
1
See the Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950 published with the Ministry
of Law Notification No. F. 46/50-C, dated the 26th January, 1950, Gazette of India,
Extraordinary, p. 678.

92

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 190-191.)
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications
mentioned in 1[clause (1) or clause (2) of article 191];
or
2

[(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand
addressed to the speaker or the Chairman, as the
case may be, and his resignation is accepted by the
Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be,]
his seat shall thereupon become vacant:
3
[Provided that in the case of any resignation referred
to in sub-clause (b), if from information received or
otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit,
the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, is
satisfied that such resignation is not voluntary or genuine,
he shall not accept such resignation.]

(4) If for a period of sixty days a member of a House
of the Legislature of a State is without permission of the
House absent from all meetings thereof, the House may
declare his seat vacant:
Provided that in computing the said period of sixty
days no account shall be taken of any period during
which the House is prorogued or is adjourned for more
than four consecutive days.
Disqualifications
for membership.

191. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being
chosen as, and for being, a member of the Legislative
Assembly or Legislative Council of a State—
(a) if he holds any office of profit under the
Government of India or the Government of any State
specified in the First Schedule, other than an office
declared by the Legislature of the State by law not to
disqualify its holder;
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so
declared by a competent court;

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 4, for “clause (1) of
article 191” (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-third Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 3, for sub-clause (b).
3
Ins. by s. 3, ibid.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

93

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 191—193.)
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily
acquired the citizenship of a foreign State, or is under
any acknowledgment of allegiance or adherence to a
foreign State;
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law
made by Parliament.
1

[Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause], a
person shall not be deemed to hold an office of profit
under the Government of India or the Government of
any State specified in the First Schedule by reason
only that he is a Minister either for the Union or for such
State.
2

[(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member
of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a
State if he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.]
3

[192. (1) If any question arises as to whether a
member of a House of the Legislature of a State has
become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned
in clause (1) of article 191, the question shall be referred
for the decision of the Governor and his decision shall
be final.

Decision on
questions as to
disqualifications
of members.

(2) Before giving any decision on any such question,
the Governor shall obtain the opinion of the Election
Commission and shall act according to such opinion.]
193. If a person sits or votes as a member of the
Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State
before he has complied with the requirements of article
188, or when he knows that he is not qualified or that he
is disqualified for membership thereof, or that he is
prohibited from so doing by the provisions of any law
made by Parliament or the Legislature of the State, he

Penalty for sitting
and voting before
making oath or
affirmation under
article 188 or when
not qualified or
when disqualified.

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 5, for “(2) For the
purposes of this article” (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
2
Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
3
Art. 192 has been successively subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)
Act, 1976, s. 33 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 25 to read as above (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

94

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 193—195.)
shall be liable in respect of each day on which he so sits
or votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be
recovered as a debt due to the State.
Powers, Privileges and Immunities of State Legislatures and
their Members
Powers, privileges,
etc., of the Houses
of Legislatures and
of the members
and committees
thereof.

194. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution
and to the rules and standing orders regulating the
procedure of the Legislature, there shall be freedom of
speech in the Legislature of every State.
(2) No member of the Legislature of a State shall be
liable to any proceedings in any court in respect of
anything said or any vote given by him in the Legislature
or any committee thereof, and no person shall be so liable
in respect of the publication by or under the authority of
a House of such a Legislature of any report, paper, votes
or proceedings.
(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and
immunities of a House of the Legislature of a State, and
of the members and the committees of a House of such
Legislature, shall be such as may from time to time be
defined by the Legislature by law, and, until so defined,
1
[shall be those of that House and of its members and
committees immediately before the coming into force of
section 26 of the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978].
(4) The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall
apply in relation to persons who by virtue of this
Constitution have the right to speak in, and otherwise to
take part in the proceedings of, a House of the Legislature
of a State or any committee thereof as they apply in
relation to members of that Legislature.

Salaries and
allowances of
members.

195. Members of the Legislative Assembly and the
Legislative Council of a State shall be entitled to receive
such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be
determined, by the Legislature of the State by law and,

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 26, for certain words
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

95

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 195—197.)
until provision in that respect is so made, salaries and
allowances at such rates and upon such conditions as
were immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution applicable in the case of members of the
Legislative Assembly of the corresponding Province.
Legislative Procedure
196. (1) Subject to the provisions of articles 198 and
207 with respect to Money Bills and other financial Bills,
a Bill may originate in either House of the Legislature of
a State which has a Legislative Council.

Provisions as to
introduction and
passing of Bills.

(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 197 and 198,
a Bill shall not be deemed to have been passed by the
Houses of the Legislature of a State having a Legislative
Council unless it has been agreed to by both Houses,
either without amendment or with such amendments
only as are agreed to by both Houses.
(3) A Bill pending in the Legislature of a State shall
not lapse by reason of the prorogation of the House or
Houses thereof.
(4) A Bill pending in the Legislative Council of a
State which has not been passed by the Legislative
Assembly shall not lapse on a dissolution of the
Assembly.
(5) A Bill which is pending in the Legislative
Assembly of a State, or which having been passed by
the Legislative Assembly is pending in the Legislative
Council, shall lapse on a dissolution of the Assembly.
197. (1) If after a Bill has been passed by the
Legislative Assembly of a State having a Legislative
Council and transmitted to the Legislative Council—
(a) the Bill is rejected by the Council; or
(b) more than three months elapse from the date
on which the Bill is laid before the Council without
the Bill being passed by it; or
(c) the Bill is passed by the Council with
amendments to which the Legislative Assembly does
not agree;

Restriction on
powers of
Legislative Council
as to Bills other
than Money Bills.

96

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 197—198.)
the Legislative Assembly may, subject to the rules
regulating its procedure, pass the Bill again in the same
or in any subsequent session with or without such
amendments, if any, as have been made, suggested or
agreed to by the Legislative Council and then transmit
the Bill as so passed to the Legislative Council.
(2) If after a Bill has been so passed for the second
time by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the
Legislative Council—
(a) the Bill is rejected by the Council; or
(b) more than one month elapses from the date on
which the Bill is laid before the Council without the
Bill being passed by it; or
(c) the Bill is passed by the Council with
amendments to which the Legislative Assembly does
not agree;
the Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by the
Houses of the Legislature of the State in the form in
which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly for the
second time with such amendments, if any, as have been
made or suggested by the Legislative Council and agreed
to by the Legislative Assembly.
(3) Nothing in this article shall apply to a Money
Bill.
Special procedure
in respect of
Money Bills.

198. (1) A Money Bill shall not be introduced in a
Legislative Council.
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the
Legislative Assembly of a State having a Legislative
Council, it shall be transmitted to the Legislative Council
for its recommendations, and the Legislative Council shall
within a period of fourteen days from the date of its
receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the Legislative
Assembly with its recommendations, and the Legislative
Assembly may thereupon either accept or reject all or
any of the recommendations of the Legislative Council.
(3) If the Legislative Assembly accepts any of the
recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money

97

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 198-199.)
Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both Houses
with the amendments recommended by the Legislative
Council and accepted by the Legislative Assembly.
(4) If the Legislative Assembly does not accept any
of the recommendations of the Legislative Council, the
Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both
Houses in the form in which it was passed by the
Legislative Assembly without any of the amendments
recommended by the Legislative Council.
(5) If a Money Bill passed by the Legislative Assembly
and transmitted to the Legislative Council for its
recommendations is not returned to the Legislative
Assembly within the said period of fourteen days, it shall
be deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the
expiration of the said period in the form in which it was
passed by the Legislative Assembly.
199. (1) For the purposes of this Chapter, a Bill shall
be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only
provisions dealing with all or any of the following
matters, namely:—
(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration
or regulation of any tax;
(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or
the giving of any guarantee by the State, or the
amendment of the law with respect to any financial
obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the
State;
(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the
Contingency Fund of the State, the payment of
moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any
such Fund;
(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of the State;
(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be
expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of
the State, or the increasing of the amount of any
such expenditure;

Definition of
“Money Bills”.

98

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 199-200.)
(f) the receipt of money on account of the
Consolidated Fund of the State or the public account
of the State or the custody or issue of such money; or
(g) any matter incidental to any of the matters
specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f).
(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by
reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or
other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment
of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by
reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition,
remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local
authority or body for local purposes.
(3) If any question arises whether a Bill introduced in
the Legislature of a State which has a Legislative Council
is a Money Bill or not, the decision of the Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly of such State thereon shall be final.
(4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when
it is transmitted to the Legislative Council under article
198, and when it is presented to the Governor for assent
under article 200, the certificate of the Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly signed by him that it is a Money
Bill.
Assent to Bills.

200. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative
Assembly of a State or, in the case of a State having a
Legislative Council, has been passed by both Houses of
the Legislature of the State, it shall be presented to the
Governor and the Governor shall declare either that he
assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom
or that he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the
President:
Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible
after the presentation to him of the Bill for assent, return the
Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a message
requesting that the House or Houses will reconsider the
Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular,
will consider the desirability of introducing any such
amendments as he may recommend in his message and,

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

99

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 200—202.)
when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall
reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed
again by the House or Houses with or without
amendment and presented to the Governor for assent,
the Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom:
Provided further that the Governor shall not assent
to, but shall reserve for the consideration of the President,
any Bill which in the opinion of the Governor would, if
it became law, so derogate from the powers of the High
Court as to endanger the position which that Court is by
this Constitution designed to fill.
201. When a Bill is reserved by a Governor for the
consideration of the President, the President shall declare
either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds
assent therefrom:

Bills reserved for
consideration.

Provided that, where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the
President may direct the Governor to return the Bill to the
House or, as the case may be, the Houses of the
Legislature of the State together with such a message as
is mentioned in the first proviso to article 200 and, when
a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall reconsider
it accordingly within a period of six months from the
date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed
by the House or Houses with or without amendment, it
shall be presented again to the President for his
consideration.
Procedure in Financial Matters
202. (1) The Governor shall in respect of every
financial year cause to be laid before the House or Houses
of the Legislature of the State a statement of the estimated
receipts and expenditure of the State for that year, in this
Part referred to as the "annual financial statement".
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the
annual financial statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure
described by this Constitution as expenditure
charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State;
and

Annual financial
statement.

100

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 202-203.)
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure
proposed to be made from the Consolidated Fund of
the State;
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account
from other expenditure.
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure
charged on the Consolidated Fund of each State—
(a) the emoluments and allowances of the
Governor and other expenditure relating to his office;
(b) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and
the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and,
in the case of a State having a Legislative Council,
also of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of
the Legislative Council;
(c) debt charges for which the State is liable
including interest, sinking fund charges and
redemption charges, and other expenditure relating
to the raising of loans and the service and redemption
of debt;
(d) expenditure in respect of the salaries and
allowances of Judges of any High Court;
(e) any sums required to satisfy any judgment,
decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal;
(f) any other expenditure declared by this
Constitution, or by the Legislature of the State by
law, to be so charged.
Procedure in
Legislature with
respect to
estimates.

203. (1) So much of the estimates as relates to
expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of a
State shall not be submitted to the vote of the Legislative
Assembly, but nothing in this clause shall be construed
as preventing the discussion in the Legislature of any of
those estimates.
(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other
expenditure shall be submitted in the form of demands
for grants to the Legislative Assembly, and the Legislative
Assembly shall have power to assent, or to refuse to
assent, to any demand, or to assent to any demand subject
to a reduction of the amount specified therein.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

101

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 203—205.)
(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on
the recommendation of the Governor.
204. (1) As soon as may be after the grants under
article 203 have been made by the Assembly, there shall
be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out
of the Consolidated Fund of the State of all moneys
required to meet—

Appropriation Bills.

(a) the grants so made by the Assembly; and
(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated
Fund of the State but not exceeding in any case the
amount shown in the statement previously laid
before the House or Houses.
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill
in the House or either House of the Legislature of the
State which will have the effect of varying the amount or
altering the destination of any grant so made or of varying
the amount of any expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of the State, and the decision of the
person presiding as to whether an amendment is
inadmissible under this clause shall be final.
(3) Subject to the provisions of articles 205 and 206,
no money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated
Fund of the State except under appropriation made by
law passed in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
205. (1) The Governor shall—
(a) if the amount authorised by any law made in
accordance with the provisions of article 204 to be
expended for a particular service for the current
financial year is found to be insufficient for the
purposes of that year or when a need has arisen
during the current financial year for supplementary
or additional expenditure upon some new service
not contemplated in the annual financial statement
for that year, or

Supplementary,
additional or
excess grants.

102

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 205-206.)
(b) if any money has been spent on any service
during a financial year in excess of the amount
granted for that service and for that year,
cause to be laid before the House or the Houses of the
Legislature of the State another statement showing the
estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be
presented to the Legislative Assembly of the State a
demand for such excess, as the case may be.
(2) The provisions of articles 202, 203 and 204 shall
have effect in relation to any such statement and
expenditure or demand and also to any law to be made
authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of the State to meet such expenditure
or the grant in respect of such demand as they have effect
in relation to the annual financial statement and the
expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a grant
and the law to be made for the authorisation of
appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of
the State to meet such expenditure or grant.
Votes on account,
votes of credit and
exceptional grants.

206. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing
provisions of this Chapter, the Legislative Assembly of a
State shall have power—
(a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the
estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year
pending the completion of the procedure prescribed
in article 203 for the voting of such grant and the
passing of the law in accordance with the provisions
of article 204 in relation to that expenditure;
(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected
demand upon the resources of the State when on
account of the magnitude or the indefinite character
of the service the demand cannot be stated with the
details ordinarily given in an annual financial
statement;
(c) to make an exceptional grant which forms no
part of the current service of any financial year;
and the Legislature of the State shall have power to
authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

103

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 206—208.)
Consolidated Fund of the State for the purposes for which
the said grants are made.
(2) The provisions of articles 203 and 204 shall have
effect in relation to the making of any grant under clause
(1) and to any law to be made under that clause as they
have effect in relation to the making of a grant with
regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual
financial statement and the law to be made for the
authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of the State to meet such expenditure.
207. (1) A Bill or amendment making provision for
any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of
clause (1) of article 199 shall not be introduced or moved
except on the recommendation of the Governor, and a Bill
making such provision shall not be introduced in a
Legislative Council:

Special provisions
as to financial Bills.

Provided that no recommendation shall be required
under this clause for the moving of an amendment
making provision for the reduction or abolition of any
tax.
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make
provision for any of the matters aforesaid by reason only
that it provides for the imposition of fines or other
pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees
for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that
it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission,
alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority
or body for local purposes.
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into
operation, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be passed by a
House of the Legislature of the State unless the Governor
has recommended to that House the consideration of
the Bill.
Procedure Generally
208. (1) A House of the Legislature of a State may
make rules for regulating, subject to the provisions of
this Constitution, its procedure and the conduct of its
business.

Rules of procedure.

104

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 208—210.)
(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules of
procedure and standing orders in force immediately
before the commencement of this Constitution with
respect to the Legislature for the corresponding Province
shall have effect in relation to the Legislature of the State
subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be
made therein by the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly,
or the Chairman of the Legislative Council, as the case
may be.
(3) In a State having a Legislative Council the
Governor, after consultation with the Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly and the Chairman of the Legislative
Council, may make rules as to the procedure with respect
to communications between the two Houses.
Regulation by law
of procedure in the
Legislature of the
State in relation to
financial business.

209. The Legislature of a State may, for the purpose
of the timely completion of financial business, regulate
by law the procedure of, and the conduct of business in,
the House or Houses of the Legislature of the State in
relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the
appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund
of the State, and, if and so far as any provision of any
law so made is inconsistent with any rule made by the
House or either House of the Legislature of the State
under clause (1) of article 208 or with any rule or standing
order having effect in relation to the Legislature of the
State under clause (2) of that article, such provision shall
prevail.

Language to be
used in the
Legislature.

210. (1) Notwithstanding anything in Part XVII, but
subject to the provisions of article 348, business in the
Legislature of a State shall be transacted in the official
language or languages of the State or in Hindi or in
English:
Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly
or Chairman of the Legislative Council, or person acting
as such, as the case may be, may permit any member
who cannot adequately express himself in any of the
languages aforesaid to address the House in his mothertongue.
(2) Unless the Legislature of the State by law
otherwise provides, this article shall, after the expiration

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

105

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 210—213.)
of a period of fifteen years from the commencement of
this Constitution, have effect as if the words “or in
English” were omitted therefrom:
1

[Provided that in relation to the 2[Legislatures of
the States of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya
and Tripura] this clause shall have effect as if for the
words “fifteen years” occurring therein, the words
“twenty-five years” were substituted:]
3

[Provided further that in relation to the
[Legislatures of the States of 5[Arunachal Pradesh, Goa
and Mizoram]], this clause shall have effect as if for the
words “fifteen years” occurring therein, the words
“forty years” were substituted.]

4

211. No discussion shall take place in the Legislature
of a State with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the
Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of
his duties.

Restriction on
discussion in the
Legislature.

212. (1) The validity of any proceedings in the
Legislature of a State shall not be called in question on
the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

Courts not to
inquire into
proceedings of the
Legislature.

(2) No officer or member of the Legislature of a State
in whom powers are vested by or under this Constitution
for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for
maintaining order, in the Legislature shall be subject to
the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by
him of those powers.
CHAPTER IV.—LEGISLATIVE POWER OF THE GOVERNOR
213. (1) If at any time, except when the Legislative
Assembly of a State is in session, or where there is a
Legislative Council in a State, except when both Houses

1

Power of
Governor to
promulgate
Ordinances during
recess of
Legislature.

Ins. by the State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970 (53 of 1970), s. 46 (w.e.f. 25-1-1971).
Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for
“Legislature of the State of Himachal Pradesh” (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
3
Ins. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
4
Subs. by the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 (69 of 1986), s. 42, for “Legislature
of the State of Mizoram” (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
5
Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 63, for
“Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram” (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
2

106

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Art. 213.)
of the Legislature are in session, the Governor is satisfied
that circumstances exist which render it necessary for
him to take immediate action, he may promulgate
such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to
require:
Provided that the Governor shall not, without
instructions from the President, promulgate any such
Ordinance if—
(a) a Bill containing the same provisions would
under this Constitution have required the previous
sanction of the President for the introduction thereof
into the Legislature; or
(b) he would have deemed it necessary to reserve
a Bill containing the same provisions for the
consideration of the President; or
(c) an Act of the Legislature of the State containing
the same provisions would under this Constitution
have been invalid unless, having been reserved for
the consideration of the President, it had received
the assent of the President.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall
have the same force and effect as an Act of the Legislature
of the State assented to by the Governor, but every such
Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly
of the State, or where there is a Legislative Council
in the State, before both the Houses, and shall cease
to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the
reassembly of the Legislature, or if before the
expiration of that period a resolution disapproving it
is passed by the Legislative Assembly and agreed to
by the Legislative Council, if any, upon the passing
of the resolution or, as the case may be, on the
resolution being agreed to by the Council; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the
Governor.
Explanation.—Where the Houses of the Legislature

107

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 213—216.)
of a State having a Legislative Council are summoned to
reassemble on different dates, the period of six weeks
shall be reckoned from the later of those dates for the
purposes of this clause.
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article
makes any provision which would not be valid if enacted
in an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by
the Governor, it shall be void:
Provided that, for the purposes of the provisions of
this Constitution relating to the effect of an Act of the
Legislature of a State which is repugnant to an Act of
Parliament or an existing law with respect to a matter
enumerated in the Concurrent List, an Ordinance
promulgated under this article in pursuance of
instructions from the President shall be deemed to be an
Act of the Legislature of the State which has been
reserved for the consideration of the President and
assented to by him.
1

*

*

*

CHAPTER V.—THE HIGH COURTS IN

*
THE

*
STATES

214. 2*** There shall be a High Court for each State.
3

*

*

*

*

High Courts for
States.

*

215. Every High Court shall be a court of record and
shall have all the powers of such a court including the
power to punish for contempt of itself.

High Courts to be
courts of record.

216. Every High Court shall consist of a Chief Justice
and such other Judges as the President may from time to
time deem it necessary to appoint.

Constitution of
High Courts.

4

*

*

*

*

*

1
Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 3
(retrospectively) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 27 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2
The brackets and figure “(1)” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.
3
Cls. (2) and (3) omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.
4
Proviso omitted by s. 11, ibid.

108

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Art. 217.)
Appointment and
conditions of the
office of a Judge
of a High Court.

217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed
by the President by warrant under his hand and seal
after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the
Governor of the State, and, in the case of appointment of
a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of
the High Court, and 1[shall hold office, in the case of an
additional or acting Judge, as provided in article 224,
and in any other case, until he attains the age of 2[sixtytwo years]]:
Provided that—
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand
addressed to the President, resign his office;
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office by the
President in the manner provided in clause (4) of
article 124 for the removal of a Judge of the Supreme
Court;
(c) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his
being appointed by the President to be a Judge of
the Supreme Court or by his being transferred by the
President to any other High Court within the territory
of India.
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as
a Judge of a High Court unless he is a citizen of India
and—
(a) has for at least ten years held a judicial office
in the territory of India; or
(b) has for at least ten years been an advocate of
a High Court 3*** or of two or more such Courts in
succession; 4***
4

*

*

*

*

*

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 12, for “shall hold office
until he attains the age of sixty years”.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 4, for “sixty years”.
3
The words “in any State specified in the First Schedule” omitted by the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
4
The word “or” and sub-clause (c) were ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 36 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Fortyfourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 28 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

109

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 217-218.)
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause—
1

[(a) in computing the period during which a
person has held judicial office in the territory of India,
there shall be included any period, after he has held
any judicial office, during which the person has been
an advocate of a High Court or has held the office
of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the
Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law;]
2

[(aa)] in computing the period during which a
person has been an advocate of a High Court, there
shall be included any period during which the person
3
[has held judicial office or the office of a member of
a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State,
requiring special knowledge of law] after he became
an advocate;
(b) in computing the period during which a person
has held judicial office in the territory of India or
been an advocate of a High Court, there shall be
included any period before the commencement of
this Constitution during which he has held judicial
office in any area which was comprised before the
fifteenth day of August, 1947, within India as defined
by the Government of India Act, 1935, or has been
an advocate of any High Court in any such area, as
the case may be.
4

[(3) If any question arises as to the age of a Judge
of a High Court, the question shall be decided by the
President after consultation with the Chief Justice of India
and the decision of the President shall be final.]
218. The provisions of clauses (4) and (5) of article
124 shall apply in relation to a High Court as they apply
in relation to the Supreme Court with the substitution of
references to the High Court for references to the Supreme
Court.

Application of
certain provisions
relating to Supreme
Court to High
Courts.

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 28 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

2

Cl. (a) re-lettered as cl. (aa) by s. 28, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

3

Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 36, for “has held
judicial office” (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
4
Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 4 (with retrospective
effect).

110

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 219—222.)
Oath or
affirmation by
Judges of High
Courts.

Restriction on
practice after being
a permanent Judge.

219. Every person appointed to be a Judge of a High
Court 1*** shall, before he enters upon his office, make
and subscribe before the Governor of the State, or some
person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose
in the Third Schedule.
2

[220. No person who, after the commencement of
this Constitution, has held office as a permanent Judge of
a High Court shall plead or act in any court or before any
authority in India except the Supreme Court and the
other High Courts.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression “High
Court” does not include a High Court for a State specified
in Part B of the First Schedule as it existed before
the commencement 3 of the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956.]

Salaries, etc., of
Judges.

221. 4[(1) There shall be paid to the Judges of each
High Court such salaries as may be determined by
Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is
so made, such salaries as are specified in the Second
Schedule.]
(2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such allowances
and to such rights in respect of leave of absence and
pension as may from time to time be determined by or
under law made by Parliament and, until so determined,
to such allowances and rights as are specified in the
Second Schedule:
Provided that neither the allowances of a Judge nor
his rights in respect of leave of absence or pension shall
be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.

Transfer of a
Judge from one
High Court to
another.

222. (1) The President may, after consultation with
the Chief Justice of India, transfer a Judge from one High
Court to any other High Court 5***.

1
The words “in a State“ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956,
s. 29 and Sch.
2
Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for art. 220.
3
1st November, 1956.
4
Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 3, for cl. (1) (w.e.f.
1-4-1986).
5
The words “within the territory of India“ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 14.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

111

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 222—224A.)
1

[(2) When a Judge has been or is so transferred, he
shall, during the period he serves, after the commencement
of the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, as
a Judge of the other High Court, be entitled to receive in
addition to his salary such compensatory allowance as
may be determined by Parliament by law and, until so
determined, such compensatory allowance as the
President may by order fix.]
223. When the office of Chief Justice of a High Court
is vacant or when any such Chief Justice is, by reason of
absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his
office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such
one of the other Judges of the Court as the President may
appoint for the purpose.
2

[224. (1) If by reason of any temporary increase in the
business of a High Court or by reason of arrears of work
therein, it appears to the President that the number of the
Judges of that Court should be for the time being
increased, the President may appoint duly qualified
persons to be additional Judges of the Court for such
period not exceeding two years as he may specify.

Appointment of
acting Chief Justice.

Appointment of
additional and
acting Judges.

(2) When any Judge of a High Court other than the
Chief Justice is by reason of absence or for any other
reason unable to perform the duties of his office or is
appointed to act temporarily as Chief Justice, the
President may appoint a duly qualified person to act as
a Judge of that Court until the permanent Judge has
resumed his duties.
(3) No person appointed as an additional or acting
Judge of a High Court shall hold office after attaining the
age of 3[sixty-two years].]
4

[224A. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter,
the Chief Justice of a High Court for any State may at
any time, with the previous consent of the President,

Appointment of
retired Judges at
sittings of High
Courts.

1
Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 5. Original cl. (2) was
omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 14.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 15, for art. 224.
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 6, for “sixty years”.
4
Ins. by s. 7, ibid.

112

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 224A—226.)
request any person who has held the office of a Judge of
that Court or of any other High Court to sit and act as a
Judge of the High Court for that State, and every such
person so requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be
entitled to such allowances as the President may by order
determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and
privileges of, but shall not otherwise be deemed to be, a
Judge of that High Court:
Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed
to require any such person as aforesaid to sit and act as
a Judge of that High Court unless he consents so to do.]
Jurisdiction of
existing High
Courts.

225. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and
to the provisions of any law of the appropriate Legislature
made by virtue of powers conferred on that Legislature
by this Constitution, the jurisdiction of, and the law
administered in, any existing High Court, and the
respective powers of the Judges thereof in relation to the
administration of justice in the Court, including any
power to make rules of Court and to regulate the sittings
of the Court and of members thereof sitting alone or in
Division Courts, shall be the same as immediately before
the commencement of this Constitution:
1
[Provided that any restriction to which the exercise
of original jurisdiction by any of the High Courts with
respect to any matter concerning the revenue or concerning
any act ordered or done in the collection thereof was
subject immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution shall no longer apply to the exercise of such
jurisdiction.]

Power of High
Courts to issue
certain writs.

2
[226. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 32 3***
every High Court shall have power, throughout the
territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to
issue to any person or authority, including in appropriate
cases, any Government, within those territories directions,

1
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 29, (w.e.f.
20-6-1979). Original proviso was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)
Act, 1976, s. 37 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 38, for art. 226
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3
The words, figures and letters “but subject to the provisions of article 131A and article
226A” omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 7 (w.e.f.
13-4-1978).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

113

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 226.)
orders or writs, including 1[writs in the nature of habeas
corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari,
or any of them, for the enforcement of any of the rights
conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.]
(2) The power conferred by clause (1) to issue
directions, orders or writs to any Government, authority
or person may also be exercised by any High Court
exercising jurisdiction in relation to the territories within
which the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises for the
exercise of such power, notwithstanding that the seat of
such Government or authority or the residence of such
person is not within those territories.
2

[(3) Where any party against whom an interim order,
whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other
manner, is made on, or in any proceedings relating to, a
petition under clause (1), without—
(a) furnishing to such party copies of such petition
and all documents in support of the plea for such
interim order; and
(b) giving such party an opportunity of being
heard,
makes an application to the High Court for the vacation
of such order and furnishes a copy of such application
to the party in whose favour such order has been made
or the counsel of such party, the High Court shall dispose
of the application within a period of two weeks from the
date on which it is received or from the date on which
the copy of such application is so furnished, whichever
is later, or where the High Court is closed on the last
day of that period, before the expiry of the next day
afterwards on which the High Court is open; and if the
application is not so disposed of, the interim order shall,
on the expiry of that period, or, as the case may be, the
expiry of the said next day, stand vacated.]
1

Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 30, for the portion
beginning with the words “writs in the nauture of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo
warranto and certiorari, or any of them” and ending with the words “such illegality has
resulted in substantial failure of justice” (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
2
Subs. by s. 30, ibid., for cls. (3), (4), (5) and (6) (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).

114

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 226-227.)
1

[(4) The power conferred on a High Court by this
article shall not be in derogation of the power conferred
on the Supreme Court by clause (2) of article 32.]
2

226A. [Constitutional validity of Central laws not to be
considered in proceedings under article 226.] Rep. by the
Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 8 (w.e.f.
13-4-1978).
Power of
superintendence
over all courts by
the High Court.

227. 3 [(1) Every High Court shall have
superintendence over all courts and tribunals throughout
the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction.]
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing provision, the High Court may—
(a) call for returns from such courts;
(b) make and issue general rules and prescribe
forms for regulating the practice and proceedings of
such courts; and
(c) prescribe forms in which books, entries and
accounts shall be kept by the officers of any such
courts.
(3) The High Court may also settle tables of fees to
be allowed to the sheriff and all clerks and officers of
such courts and to attorneys, advocates and pleaders
practising therein:
Provided that any rules made, forms prescribed or
tables settled under clause (2) or clause (3) shall not be
inconsistent with the provision of any law for the time
being in force, and shall require the previous approval of
the Governor.
(4) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to confer
on a High Court powers of superintendence over any
court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating
to the Armed Forces.

1
Cl. (7) renumbered as cl. (4) by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 30 (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 39 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3
Cl. (1) has been successively subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act,
1976, s. 40 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 31, to read as above (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

115

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 227—229.)
1

*

*

*

*

*

228. If the High Court is satisfied that a case pending
in a court subordinate to it involves a substantial question
of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution the
determination of which is necessary for the disposal of
the case, 2[it shall withdraw the case and 3*** may—]

Transfer of certain
cases to High
Court.

(a) either dispose of the case itself, or
(b) determine the said question of law and return
the case to the court from which the case has been
so withdrawn together with a copy of its judgment
on such question, and the said court shall on receipt
thereof proceed to dispose of the case in conformity
with such judgment.
4

228A. [Special provisions as to disposal of questions
relating to constitutional validity of State laws.] Rep. by the
Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 10 (w.e.f.
13-4-1978).
229. (1) Appointments of officers and servants of a
High Court shall be made by the Chief Justice of the
Court or such other Judge or officer of the Court as he
may direct:

Officers and
servants and the
expenses of High
Courts.

Provided that the Governor of the State 5*** may by
rule require that in such cases as may be specified in the
rule no person not already attached to the Court shall be
appointed to any office connected with the Court save
after consultation with the State Public Service
Commission.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the
Legislature of the State, the conditions of service of
1
Cl. (5) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 40 (w.e.f.
1-2-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 31
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act. 1976, s. 41, for “it shall
withdraw the case and may —” (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3
The words, figures and letters “subject to the provisions of article 131A,“ omitted by
the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 9 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
4
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 42 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
5
The words “in which the High Court has its principal seat” omitted by the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.

116

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 229—231.)
officers and servants of a High Court shall be such as
may be prescribed by rules made by the Chief Justice of
the Court or by some other Judge or officer of the Court
authorised by the Chief Justice to make rules for the
purpose:
Provided that the rules made under this clause shall,
so far as they relate to salaries, allowances, leave or
pensions, require the approval of the Governor of the
State 1***.
(3) The administrative expenses of a High Court,
including all salaries, allowances and pensions payable
to or in respect of the officers and servants of the Court,
shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State,
and any fees or other moneys taken by the Court shall
form part of that Fund.
Extension of
jurisdiction of
High Courts to
Union territories.

2
[230. (1) Parliament may by law extend the
jurisdiction of a High Court to, or exclude the jurisdiction
of a High Court from, any Union territory.

(2) Where the High Court of a State exercises
jurisdiction in relation to a Union territory,—
(a) nothing in this Constitution shall be construed
as empowering the Legislature of the State to increase,
restrict or abolish that jurisdiction; and
(b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor
shall, in relation to any rules, forms or tables for
subordinate courts in that territory, be construed as
a reference to the President.
Establishment of
a common High
Court for two or
more States.

231. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
preceding provisions of this Chapter, Parliament may by
law establish a common High Court for two or more
States or for two or more States and a Union territory.
(2) In relation to any such High Court,—
(a) the reference in article 217 to the Governor of
the State shall be construed as a reference to the
Governors of all the States in relation to which the
High Court exercises jurisdiction;

1
The words “in which the High Court has its principal seat” omitted by the Constitution
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2

Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for arts. 230, 231 and 232.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

117

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 231—233A.)
(b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor
shall, in relation to any rules, forms or tables for
subordinate courts, be construed as a reference to
the Governor of the State in which the subordinate
courts are situate; and
(c) the references in articles 219 and 229 to the
State shall be construed as a reference to the State in
which the High Court has its principal seat:
Provided that if such principal seat is in a Union
territory, the references in articles 219 and 229 to the
Governor, Public Service Commission, Legislature and
Consolidated Fund of the State shall be construed
respectively as references to the President, Union Public
Service Commission, Parliament and Consolidated Fund
of India.]
CHAPTER VI.—SUBORDINATE COURTS
233. (1) Appointments of persons to be, and the posting
and promotion of, district judges in any State shall be
made by the Governor of the State in consultation with
the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such
State.

Appointment of
district judges.

(2) A person not already in the service of the Union
or of the State shall only be eligible to be appointed a
district judge if he has been for not less than seven years
an advocate or a pleader and is recommended by the
High Court for appointment.
1
[233A. Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or
order of any court,—

(a) (i) no appointment of any person already in
the judicial service of a State or of any person who
has been for not less than seven years an advocate
or a pleader, to be a district judge in that State, and
(ii) no posting, promotion or transfer of any such
person as a district judge,
made at any time before the commencement of the
Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966,
1

Ins. by the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966, s. 2.

Validation of
appointments of,
and judgments,
etc., delivered by,
certain district
judges.

118

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 233A—236.)
otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of
article 233 or article 235 shall be deemed to be illegal or
void or ever to have become illegal or void by reason
only of the fact that such appointment, posting,
promotion or transfer was not made in accordance with
the said provisions;]
(b) no jurisdiction exercised, no judgment, decree,
sentence or order passed or made, and no other act
or proceeding done or taken, before the
commencement of the Constitution (Twentieth
Amendment) Act, 1966 by, or before, any person
appointed, posted, promoted or transferred as a
district judge in any State otherwise than in
accordance with the provisions of article 233 or
article 235 shall be deemed to be illegal or invalid or
ever to have become illegal or invalid by reason only
of the fact that such appointment, posting, promotion
or transfer was not made in accordance with the said
provisions.]
Recruitment of
persons other than
district judges to
the judicial service.

234. Appointments of persons other than district
judges to the judicial service of a State shall be made by
the Governor of the State in accordance with rules made
by him in that behalf after consultation with the State
Public Service Commission and with the High Court
exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.

Control over
subordinate courts.

235. The control over district courts and courts
subordinate thereto including the posting and promotion
of, and the grant of leave to, persons belonging to the
judicial service of a State and holding any post inferior
to the post of district judge shall be vested in the High
Court, but nothing in this article shall be construed as
taking away from any such person any right of appeal
which he may have under the law regulating the
conditions of his service or as authorising the High Court
to deal with him otherwise than in accordance with the
conditions of his service prescribed under such law.

Interpretation.

236. In this Chapter—
(a) the expression "district judge" includes judge
of a city civil court, additional district judge, joint
district judge, assistant district judge, chief judge of

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

119

(Part VI.—The States.—Arts. 236-237.)
a small cause court, chief presidency magistrate,
additional chief presidency magistrate, sessions
judge, additional sessions judge and assistant
sessions Judge;
(b) the expression “judicial service” means a
service consisting exclusively of persons intended to
fill the post of district judge and other civil judicial
posts inferior to the post of district judge.
237. The Governor may by public notification direct
that the foregoing provisions of this Chapter and any
rules made thereunder shall with effect from such date as
may be fixed by him in that behalf apply in relation to
any class or classes of magistrates in the State as they
apply in relation to persons appointed to the judicial
service of the State subject to such exceptions and
modifications as may be specified in the notification.

Application of the
provisions of this
Chapter to certain
class or classes of
magistrates.

Part VII.—[The States in Part B of the First
Schedule.] Rep. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.

120

PART VIII
1

[THE UNION TERRITORIES]

2
[239. (1) Save as otherwise provided by Parliament
by law, every Union territory shall be administered by the
President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit, through
an administrator to be appointed by him with such
designation as he may specify.

Administration of
Union territories.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Part VI,
the President may appoint the Governor of a State as the
administrator of an adjoining Union territory, and where
a Governor is so appointed, he shall exercise his functions
as such administrator independently of his Council of
Ministers.
3

[239A. (1) Parliament may by law create 4[for the
Union territory of 5[Puducherry]]—
(a) a body, whether elected or partly nominated
and partly elected, to function as a Legislature for the
Union territory, or

Creation of local
Legislatures or
Council of
Ministers or both
for certain Union
territories.

(b) a Council of Ministers,
or both with such constitution, powers and functions, in
each case, as may be specified in the law.
(2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) shall
not be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution
for the purposes of article 368 notwithstanding that it
contains any provision which amends or has the effect of
amending this Constitution.]
6

[239AA. (1) As from the date of commencement of
the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991, the
Union territory of Delhi shall be called the National

Special provisions
with respect to
Delhi.

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 17, for the heading
“THE STATES IN PART C OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE“.
2
Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for arts. 239 and 240.
3
Ins. by the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 4.
4
Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 63, for “for
any of the Union territories of Goa, Daman and Diu and Pondicherry”(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
5
Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for
“Pondicherry“ (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
6
Ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-2-1992).

121

122

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The Union territories.—Art. 239AA.)
Capital Territory of Delhi (hereafter in this Part referred
to as the National Capital Territory) and the administrator
thereof appointed under article 239 shall be designated
as the Lieutenant Governor.
(2) (a) There shall be a Legislative Assembly for the
National Capital Territory and the seats in such Assembly
shall be filled by members chosen by direct election from
territorial constituencies in the National Capital Territory.
(b) The total number of seats in the Legislative
Assembly, the number of seats reserved for Scheduled
Castes, the division of the National Capital Territory into
territorial constituencies (including the basis for such
division) and all other matters relating to the functioning
of the Legislative Assembly shall be regulated by law
made by Parliament.
(c) The provisions of articles 324 to 327 and 329 shall
apply in relation to the National Capital Territory, the
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory
and the members thereof as they apply, in relation to a
State, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the members
thereof respectively; and any reference in articles 326 and
329 to “appropriate Legislature” shall be deemed to be a
reference to Parliament.
(3) (a) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
the Legislative Assembly shall have power to make laws
for the whole or any part of the National Capital Territory
with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the
State List or in the Concurrent List in so far as any such
matter is applicable to Union territories except matters
with respect to Entries 1, 2 and 18 of the State List and
Entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate
to the said Entries 1, 2 and 18.
(b) Nothing in sub-clause (a) shall derogate from the
powers of Parliament under this Constitution to make
laws with respect to any matter for a Union territory or
any part thereof.
(c) If any provision of a law made by the Legislative
Assembly with respect to any matter is repugnant to any

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The Union territories.—Art. 239AA.)
provision of a law made by Parliament with respect to
that matter, whether passed before or after the law made
by the Legislative Assembly, or of an earlier law, other
than a law made by the Legislative Assembly, then, in
either case, the law made by Parliament, or, as the case
may be, such earlier law, shall prevail and the law made
by the Legislative Assembly shall, to the extent of the
repugnancy, be void:
Provided that if any such law made by the Legislative
Assembly has been reserved for the consideration of the
President and has received his assent, such law shall
prevail in the National Capital Territory:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shall
prevent Parliament from enacting at any time any law
with respect to the same matter including a law adding
to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by
the Legislative Assembly.
(4) There shall be a Council of Ministers consisting
of not more than ten per cent. of the total number of
members in the Legislative Assembly, with the Chief
Minister at the head to aid and advise the Lieutenant
Governor in the exercise of his functions in relation to
matters with respect to which the Legislative Assembly
has power to make laws, except in so far as he is, by or
under any law, required to act in his discretion:
Provided that in the case of difference of opinion
between the Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers on
any matter, the Lieutenant Governor shall refer it to the
President for decision and act according to the decision
given thereon by the President and pending such decision
it shall be competent for the Lieutenant Governor in any
case where the matter, in his opinion, is so urgent that
it is necessary for him to take immediate action, to take
such action or to give such direction in the matter as he
deems necessary.
(5) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the
President and other Ministers shall be appointed by
the President on the advice of the Chief Minister and the

123

124

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The Union territories.—Arts. 239AA-239AB.)
Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the
President.
(6) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively
responsible to the Legislative Assembly.
1

[(7) (a)] Parliament may, by law, make provisions for
giving effect to, or supplementing the provisions contained
in the foregoing clauses and for all matters incidental or
consequential thereto.
2

[(b) Any such law as is referred to in sub-clause (a)
shall not be deemed to be an amendment of this
Constitution for the purposes of article 368
notwithstanding that it contains any provision which
amends or has the effect of amending, this Constitution.]
(8) The provisions of article 239B shall, so far as may
be, apply in relation to the National Capital Territory, the
Lieutenant Governor and the Legislative Assembly, as
they apply in relation to the Union territory of
3
[Puducherry], the administrator and its Legislature,
respectively; and any reference in that article to
“clause (1) of article 239A” shall be deemed to be a
reference to this article or article 239AB, as the case may
be.
Provision in case
of failure of
constitutional
machinery.

239AB. If the President, on receipt of a report from
the Lieutenant Governor or otherwise, is satisfied—
(a) that a situation has arisen in which the
administration of the National Capital Territory
cannot be carried on in accordance with the
provisions of article 239AA or of any law made in
pursuance of that article; or
(b) that for the proper administration of the
National Capital Territory it is necessary or expedient
so to do,
the President may by order suspend the operation of any
provision of article 239AA or of all or any of the

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Seventieth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 3, for “(7)” (w.e.f.
21-12-1991).
2
Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 21-12-1991).
3
Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for
“Pondicherry“ (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

125

(Part VI.—The Union territories.—Arts. 239AB-239B.)
provisions of any law made in pursuance of that article
for such period and subject to such conditions as may be
specified in such law and make such incidental and
consequential provisions as may appear to him to be
necessary or expedient for administering the National
Capital Territory in accordance with the provisions of
article 239 and article 239AA.
1
[239B. (1) If at any time, except when the Legislature
of 2[the Union territory of 3[Puducherry]] is in session, the
administrator thereof is satisfied that circumstances exist
which render it necessary for him to take immediate
action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the
circumstances appear to him to require:

Power of
administrator to
promulgate
Ordinances during
recess of
Legislature.

Provided that no such Ordinance shall be
promulgated by the administrator except after obtaining
instructions from the President in that behalf:
Provided further that whenever the said Legislature
is dissolved, or its functioning remains suspended on
account of any action taken under any such law as is
referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, the administrator
shall not promulgate any Ordinance during the period
of such dissolution or suspension.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article in
pursuance of instructions from the President shall be
deemed to be an Act of the Legislature of the Union
territory which has been duly enacted after complying
with the provisions in that behalf contained in any such
law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, but
every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before the Legislature of the
Union territory and shall cease to operate at the

1
Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f.
30-12-1971).
2
Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 63, for “a
Union territory referred to in clause (1) of article 239A”(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
3
Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for
“Pondicherry“ (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).

126

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The Union territories.—Arts. 239B-240.)

Power of
President to make
regulations for
certain Union
territories.

expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the
Legislature or if, before the expiration of that period,
a resolution disapproving it is passed by the
Legislature, upon the passing of the resolution; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the
administrator after obtaining instructions from the
President in that behalf.
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article
makes any provision which would not be valid if enacted
in an Act of the Legislature of the Union territory made
after complying with the provisions in that behalf
contained in any such law as is referred to in clause (1)
of article 239A, it shall be void.]
1
*
*
*
*
240. (1) The President may make regulations for the
peace, progress and good government of the Union
territory of—
(a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands;
2
[(b) Lakshadweep;]
3
[(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli;]
4
[(d) Daman and Diu;]
5
[(e) Puducherry;]
6
***
7
***:
8
[Provided that when any body is created under article
239A to function as a Legislature for the 9[Union territory

1
Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 4
(retrospectively) and omitted by the Consititution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 32 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2
Subs. by the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973
(34 of 1973), s. 4, for entry (b) (w.e.f. 1-11-1973).
3
Ins. by the Constitution (Tenth Amendment) Act, 1961, s. 3.
4
Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 63, for
entry (d) (w.e.f. 30-5-1987). Entry (d) was ins. by the Constitution (Twelfth Amendment)
Act, 1962, s. 3.
5
Subs. by The Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for
“Pondicherry” (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
6
The entry (f) relating to Mizoram omitted by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of
1986), s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
7
The entry (g) relating to Arunachal Pradesh omitted by the State of Arunachal Pradesh
Act, 1986 (69 of 1986), s. 42 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
8
Ins. by the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 5.
9
Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 4, for “Union
territory of Goa, Daman and Diu or Pondicherry” (w.e.f. 15-2-1972).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

127

(Part VI.—The Union territories.—Arts. 240-241.)
of 1[Puducherry], the President shall not make any
regulation for the peace, progress and good government
of that Union territory with effect from the date appointed
for the first meeting of the Legislature:]
2
[Provided further that whenever the body
functioning as a Legislature for the Union territory of
1
[Puducherry] is dissolved, or the functioning of that body
as such Legislature remains suspended on account of
any action taken under any such law as is referred to in
clause (1) of article 239A, the President may, during the
period of such dissolution or suspension, make
regulations for the peace, progress and good government
of that Union territory.]

(2) Any regulation so made may repeal or amend
any Act made by Parliament or 3[any other law] which is
for the time being applicable to the Union territory
and, when promulgated by the President, shall have the
same force and effect as an Act of Parliament which
applies to that territory.]
241. (1) Parliament may by law constitute a High
Court for a 4[Union territory] or declare any court in any
5
[such territory] to be a High Court for all or any of the
purposes of this Constitution.

High Courts for
Union territories.

(2) The provisions of Chapter V of Part VI shall apply
in relation to every High Court referred to in clause (1) as
they apply in relation to a High Court referred to in
article 214 subject to such modifications or exceptions as
Parliament may by law provide.
6

[(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution
and to the provisions of any law of the appropriate

1
Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for
“Pondicherry“ (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 4 (w.e.f.
15-2-1972).
3

Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “any existing law”(w.e.f. 15-2-1972).

4

Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for “State
specified in Part C of the First Schedule”.
5

Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for “such State”.

6

Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for cls. (3) and (4).

128

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part VI.—The Union territories.—Arts. 241-242.)
Legislature made by virtue of powers conferred on that
Legislature by or under this Constitution, every
High Court exercising jurisdiction immediately before the
commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, in relation to any Union territory shall continue
to exercise such jurisdiction in relation to that territory
after such commencement.
(4) Nothing in this article derogates from the power
of Parliament to extend or exclude the jurisdiction of a
High Court for a State to, or from, any Union territory or
part thereof.]
242. [Coorg.] Rep. by the Constitution (Seventh
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.

1

[PART IX

THE PANCHAYATS
243. In this Part, unless the context otherwise
requires,—

Definitions.

(a) “district” means a district in a State;
(b) “Gram Sabha” means a body consisting of
persons registered in the electoral rolls relating to a
village comprised within the area of Panchayat at
the village level;
(c) “intermediate level” means a level between
the village and district levels specified by the
Governor of a State by public notification to be the
intermediate level for the purposes of this Part;
(d) “Panchayat” means an institution (by
whatever name called) of self-government
constituted under article 243B, for the rural areas;
(e) “Panchayat area” means the territorial area of
a Panchayat;
(f) “population” means the population as
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published;
(g) “village” means a village specified by the
Governor by public notification to be a village for
the purposes of this Part and includes a group of
villages so specified.
243A. A Gram Sabha may exercise such powers and
perform such functions at the village level as the
Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.

Gram Sabha.

243B. (1) There shall be constituted in every State,
Panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels
in accordance with the provisions of this Part.

Constitution of
Panchayats.

1
Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24-4-1993).
Original Part IX was omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and
Sch.

129

130

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IX.—The Panchayats.—Arts. 243B-243C.)
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1),
Panchayats at the intermediate level may not be
constituted in a State having a population not exceeding
twenty lakhs.
Composition of
Panchayats.

243C. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, the
Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with
respect to the composition of Panchayats:
Provided that the ratio between the population of
the territorial area of a Panchayat at any level and the
number of seats in such Panchayat to be filled by election
shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the
State.
(2) All the seats in a Panchayat shall be filled by
persons chosen by direct election from territorial
constituencies in the Panchayat area and, for this purpose,
each Panchayat area shall be divided into territorial
constituencies in such manner that the ratio between the
population of each constituency and the number of seats
allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same
throughout the Panchayat area.
(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for
the representation—
(a) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the
village level, in the Panchayats at the intermediate
level or, in the case of a State not having Panchayats
at the intermediate level, in the Panchayats at the
district level;
(b) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the
intermediate level, in the Panchayats at the district
level;
(c) of the members of the House of the People and
the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State
representing constituencies which comprise wholly
or partly a Panchayat area at a level other than the
village level, in such Panchayat;
(d) of the members of the Council of States and
the members of the Legislative Council of the

131

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IX.—The Panchayats.—Arts. 243C-243D.)
State, where they are registered as electors within—
(i) a Panchayat area at the intermediate level,
in Panchayat at the intermediate level;
(ii) a Panchayat area at the district level, in
Panchayat at the district level.
(4) The Chairperson of a Panchayat and other
members of a Panchayat whether or not chosen by direct
election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat
area shall have the right to vote in the meetings of the
Panchayats.
(5) The Chairperson of—
(a) a panchayat at the village level shall be elected
in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by
law, provide; and
(b) a Panchayat at the intermediate level or district
level shall be elected by, and from amongst, the
elected members thereof.
243D. (1) Seats shall be reserved for—
(a) the Scheduled Castes; and
(b) the Scheduled Tribes,
in every Panchayat and the number of seats so reserved
shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to
the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in
that Panchayat as the population of the Scheduled Castes
in that Panchayat area or of the Scheduled Tribes in that
Panchayat area bears to the total population of that area
and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in a Panchayat.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of
seats reserved under clause (1) shall be reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case
may be, the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of
seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of

Reservation of
seats.

132

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IX.—The Panchayats.—Arts. 243D-243E.)
seats to be filled by direct election in every Panchayat
shall be reserved for women and such seats may be
allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a
Panchayat.
(4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats
at the village or any other level shall be reserved for the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women in
such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law,
provide:
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons
reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes in the Panchayats at each level in any State shall
bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the
total number of such offices in the Panchayats at each
level as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the
State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to the
total population of the State:
Provided further that not less than one-third of the
total number of offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats
at each level shall be reserved for women:
Provided also that the number of offices reserved
under this clause shall be allotted by rotation to different
Panchayats at each level.
(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2)
and the reservation of offices of Chairpersons (other than
the reservation for women) under clause (4) shall cease
to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in
article 334.
(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature
of a State from making any provision for reservation of
seats in any Panchayat or offices of Chairpersons in the
Panchayats at any level in favour of backward class of
citizens.
Duration of
Panchayats, etc.

243E. (1) Every Panchayat, unless sooner dissolved
under any law for the time being in force, shall continue
for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting
and no longer.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

133

(Part IX.—The Panchayats.—Arts. 243E—243G.)
(2) No amendment of any law for the time being in
force shall have the effect of causing dissolution of a
Panchayat at any level, which is functioning immediately
before such amendment, till the expiration of its duration
specified in clause (1).
(3) An election to constitute a Panchayat shall be
completed—
(a) before the expiry of its duration specified in
clause (1);
(b) before the expiration of a period of six months
from the date of its dissolution:
Provided that where the remainder of the period for
which the dissolved Panchayat would have continued is
less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any
election under this clause for constituting the Panchayat
for such period.
(4) A Panchayat constituted upon the dissolution of
a Panchayat before the expiration of its duration shall
continue only for the remainder of the period for which
the dissolved Panchayat would have continued under
clause (1) had it not been so dissolved.
243F. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being
chosen as, and for being, a member of a Panchayat—

Disqualifications
for membership.

(a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for
the time being in force for the purposes of elections
to the Legislature of the State concerned:
Provided that no person shall be disqualified on
the ground that he is less than twenty-five years of
age, if he has attained the age of twenty-one years;
(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law
made by the Legislature of the State.
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of
a Panchayat has become subject to any of the
disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the question
shall be referred for the decision of such authority and in
such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law,
provide.
243G. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow the

Powers, authority
and responsibilities
of Panchayats.

134

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IX.—The Panchayats.—Arts. 243G—243-I.)
Panchayats with such powers and authority as may be
necessary to enable them to function as institutions of
self-government and such law may contain provisions
for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon
Panchayats at the appropriate level, subject to such
conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to—
(a) the preparation of plans for economic
development and social justice;
(b) the implementation of schemes for economic
development and social justice as may be entrusted
to them including those in relation to the matters
listed in the Eleventh Schedule.
Powers to impose
taxes by, and Funds
of, the Panchayats.

243H. The Legislature of a State may, by law,—
(a) authorise a Panchayat to levy, collect and
appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in
accordance with such procedure and subject to such
limits;
(b) assign to a Panchayat such taxes, duties, tolls
and fees levied and collected by the State Government
for such purposes and subject to such conditions
and limits;
(c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the
Panchayats from the Consolidated Fund of the State;
and
(d) provide for constitution of such Funds for
crediting all moneys received, respectively, by or on
behalf of the Panchayats and also for the withdrawal
of such moneys therefrom,
as may be specified in the law.

Constitution of
Finance
Commission to
review financial
position.

243-I. (1) The Governor of a State shall, as soon as
may be within one year from the commencement of the
Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992,
and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year,
constitute a Finance Commission to review the financial
position of the Panchayats and to make recommendations

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

135

(Part IX.—The Panchayats.—Arts. 243-I—243K.)
to the Governor as to—
(a) the principles which should govern—
(i) the distribution between the State and the
Panchayats of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties,
tolls and fees leviable by the State, which may be
divided between them under this Part and the
allocation between the Panchayats at all levels of
their respective shares of such proceeds;
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls
and fees which may be assigned to, or
appropriated by, the Panchayats;
(iii) the grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from
the Consolidated Fund of the State;
(b) the measures needed to improve the financial
position of the Panchayats;
(c) any other matter referred to the Finance
Commission by the Governor in the interests of
sound finance of the Panchayats.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide
for the composition of the Commission, the qualifications
which shall be requisite for appointment as members
thereof and the manner in which they shall be selected.
(3) The Commission shall determine their procedure
and shall have such powers in the performance of their
functions as the Legislature of the State may, by law,
confer on them.
(4) The Governor shall cause every recommendation
made by the Commission under this article together with
an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken
thereon to be laid before the Legislature of the State.
243J. The Legislature of a State may, by law, make
provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts
by the Panchayats and the auditing of such accounts.

Audit of accounts
of Panchayats.

243K. (1) The superintendence, direction and control
of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct
of, all elections to the Panchayats shall be vested in

Elections to the
Panchayats.

136

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IX.—The Panchayats.—Arts. 243K—243M.)
a State Election Commission consisting of a State Election
Commissioner to be appointed by the Governor.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the
Legislature of a State, the conditions of service and tenure
of office of the State Election Commissioner shall be such
as the Governor may by rule determine:
Provided that the State Election Commissioner shall
not be removed from his office except in like manner
and on the like grounds as a Judge of a High Court and
the conditions of service of the State Election
Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage
after his appointment.
(3) The Governor of a State shall, when so requested
by the State Election Commission, make available to the
State Election Commission such staff as may be necessary
for the discharge of the functions conferred on the State
Election Commission by clause (1).
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with
respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with,
elections to the Panchayats.
Application to
Union territories.

243L. The provisions of this Part shall apply to the
Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union
territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor
of a State were references to the Administrator of the
Union territory appointed under article 239 and references
to the Legislature or the Legislative Assembly of a State
were references, in relation to a Union territory having a
Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly:
Provided that the President may, by public
notification, direct that the provisions of this Part shall
apply to any Union territory or part thereof subject to
such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in
the notification.

Part not to apply
to certain areas.

243M. (1) Nothing in this Part shall apply to the
Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal
areas referred to in clause (2), of article 244.

137

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IX.—The Panchayats.—Arts. 243M-243N.)
(2) Nothing in this Part shall apply to—
(a) the States of Nagaland, Meghalaya and
Mizoram;
(b) the hill areas in the State of Manipur for which
District Councils exist under any law for the time
being in force.
(3) Nothing in this Part—
(a) relating to Panchayats at the district level shall
apply to the hill areas of the District of Darjeeling in
the State of West Bengal for which Darjeeling Gorkha
Hill Council exists under any law for the time being
in force;
(b) shall be construed to affect the functions and
powers of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council
constituted under such law.
1
[(3A) Nothing in article 243D, relating to reservation
of seats for the Scheduled Castes, shall apply to the State
of Arunachal Pradesh.]

(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
(a) the Legislature of a State referred to in subclause (a) of clause (2) may, by law, extend this part
to that State, except the areas, if any, referred to in
clause (1), if the Legislative Assembly of that State
passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the
total membership of that House and by a majority of
not less than two-thirds of the members of that House
present and voting;
(b) Parliament may, by law, extend the provisions
of this Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal
areas referred to in clause (1) subject to such
exceptions and modifications as may be specified in
such law, and no such law shall be deemed to be an
amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of
article 368.
243N. Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any
provision of any law relating to Panchayats in force in a
1

Continuance of
existing laws and
Panchayats.

Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-third Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2.

138

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IX.—The Panchayats.—Arts. 243N-243-O.)
State immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, which
is inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall
continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a
competent Legislature or other competent authority or
until the expiration of one year from such commencement,
whichever is earlier:
Provided that all the Panchayats existing immediately
before such commencement shall continue till the
expiration of their duration, unless sooner dissolved by
a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative
Assembly of that State or, in the case of a State having a
Legislative Council, by each House of the Legislature of
that State.
Bar to interference
by courts in
electoral matters.

243-O.
Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution,—
(a) the validity of any law relating to the
delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats
to such constituencies, made or purporting to be
made under article 243K, shall not be called in
question in any court;
(b) no election to any Panchayat shall be called in
question except by an election petition presented to
such authority and in such manner as is provided
for by or under any law made by the Legislature of
a State.]

1

[PART IXA

THE MUNICIPALITIES
243P. In this Part, unless the context otherwise
requires,—

Definitions.

(a) “Committee” means a Committee constituted
under article 243S;
(b) “district” means a district in a State;
(c) “Metropolitan area” means an area having a
population of ten lakhs or more, comprised in one
or more districts and consisting of two or more
Municipalities or Panchayats or other contiguous
areas, specified by the Governor by public
notification to be a Metropolitan area for the purposes
of this Part;
(d) “Municipal area” means the territorial area of
a Municipality as is notified by the Governor;
(e) “Municipality” means an institution of selfgovernment constituted under article 243Q;
(f) “Panchayat” means a Panchayat constituted
under article 243B;
(g) “population” means the population as
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published.
243Q. (1) There shall be constituted in every State,—

Constitution of
Municipalities.

(a) a Nagar Panchayat (by whatever name called)
for a transitional area, that is to say, an area in
transition from a rural area to an urban area;
(b) a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area;
and
(c) a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban
area,
1

Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f 1-6-1993).

139

140

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IXA.—The Municipalities.—Arts. 243Q-243R.)
in accordance with the provisions of this Part:
Provided that a Municipality under this clause may
not be constituted in such urban area or part thereof as
the Governor may, having regard to the size of the area
and the municipal services being provided or proposed
to be provided by an industrial establishment in that area
and such other factors as he may deem fit, by public
notification, specify to be an industrial township.
(2) In this article, “a transitional area”, “a smaller
urban area” or “a larger urban area” means such area as
the Governor may, having regard to the population of the
area, the density of the population therein, the revenue
generated for local administration, the percentage of
employment in non-agricultural activities, the economic
importance or such other factors as he may deem fit,
specify by public notification for the purposes of this
Part.
Composition of
Municipalities.

243R. (1) Save as provided in clause (2), all the seats
in a Municipality shall be filled by persons chosen by
direct election from the territorial constituencies in the
Municipal area and for this purpose each Municipal area
shall be divided into territorial constituencies to be known
as wards.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide—
(a) for the representation in a Municipality of—
(i) persons having special knowledge or
experience in Municipal administration;
(ii) the members of the House of the People
and the members of the Legislative Assembly of
the State representing constituencies which
comprise wholly or partly the Municipal area;
(iii) the members of the Council of States and
the members of the Legislative Council of the
State registered as electors within the Municipal
area;
(iv) the Chairpersons of the Committees
constituted under clause (5) of article 243S:

141

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IXA.—The Municipalities.—Arts. 243R—243T.)
Provided that the persons referred to in paragraph
(i) shall not have the right to vote in the meetings of
the Municipality;
(b) the manner of election of the Chairperson of
a Municipality.
243S. (1) There shall be constituted Wards
Committees, consisting of one or more wards, within
the territorial area of a Municipality having a population
of three lakhs or more.

Constitution and
composition of
Wards Committees,
etc.

(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make
provision with respect to—
(a) the composition and the territorial area of a
Wards Committee;
(b) the manner in which the seats in a Wards
Committee shall be filled.
(3) A member of a Municipality representing a ward
within the territorial area of the Wards Committee shall
be a member of that Committee.
(4) Where a Wards Committee consists of—
(a) one ward, the member representing that ward
in the Municipality; or
(b) two or more wards, one of the members
representing such wards in the Municipality elected
by the members of the Wards Committee,
shall be the Chairperson of that Committee.
(5) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent
the Legislature of a State from making any provision for
the constitution of Committees in addition to the Wards
Committees.
243T. (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in every Municipality
and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly
as may be, the same proportion to the total number of
seats to be filled by direct election in that Municipality
as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the
Municipal area or of the Scheduled Tribes in the
Municipal area bears to the total population of that area
and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in a Municipality.

Reservation of
seats.

142

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IXA.—The Municipalities.—Arts. 243T-243U.)
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of
seats reserved under clause (1) shall be reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case
may be, the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of
seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of
seats to be filled by direct election in every Municipality
shall be reserved for women and such seats may be
allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a
Municipality.
(4) The offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of
a State may, by law, provide.
(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2)
and the reservation of offices of Chairpersons (other than
the reservation for women) under clause (4) shall cease
to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in
article 334.
(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature
of a State from making any provision for reservation of
seats in any Municipality or offices of Chairpersons in
the Municipalities in favour of backward class of citizens.
Duration of
Municipalities,
etc.

243U. (1) Every Municipality, unless sooner dissolved
under any law for the time being in force, shall continue
for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting
and no longer:
Provided that a Municipality shall be given a
reasonable opportunity of being heard before its
dissolution.
(2) No amendment of any law for the time being in
force shall have the effect of causing dissolution of a
Municipality at any level, which is functioning
immediately before such amendment, till the expiration
of its duration specified in clause (1).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

143

(Part IXA.—The Municipalities.—Arts. 243U—243W.)
(3) An election to constitute a Municipality shall be
completed,—
(a) before the expiry of its duration specified in
clause (1);
(b) before the expiration of a period of six months
from the date of its dissolution:
Provided that where the remainder of the period for
which the dissolved Municipality would have continued
is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold
any election under this clause for constituting the
Municipality for such period.
(4) A Municipality constituted upon the dissolution
of a Municipality before the expiration of its duration
shall continue only for the remainder of the period for
which the dissolved Municipality would have continued
under clause (1) had it not been so dissolved.
243V. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being
chosen as, and for being, a member of a Municipality—

Disqualifications
for membership.

(a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for
the time being in force for the purposes of elections
to the Legislature of the State concerned:
Provided that no person shall be disqualified on
the ground that he is less than twenty-five years of
age, if he has attained the age of twenty-one years;
(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law
made by the Legislature of the State.
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of
a Municipality has become subject to any of the
disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the question
shall be referred for the decision of such authority and in
such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law,
provide.
243W. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
the Legislature of a State may, by law, endow—
(a) the Municipalities with such powers and
authority as may be necessary to enable them to
function as institutions of self-government and such
law may contain provisions for the devolution of
powers and responsibilities upon Municipalities,
subject to such conditions as may be specified therein,

Powers, authority
and responsibilities
of Municipalities,
etc.

144

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IXA.—The Municipalities.—Arts. 243W—243Y.)
with respect to—
(i) the preparation of plans for economic
development and social justice;
(ii) the performance of functions and the
implementation of schemes as may be entrusted to
them including those in relation to the matters
listed in the Twelfth Schedule;
(b) the Committees with such powers and
authority as may be necessary to enable them to carry
out the responsibilities conferred upon them
including those in relation to the matters listed in the
Twelfth Schedule.
Power to impose
taxes by, and Funds
of, the
Municipalities.

243X. The Legislature of a State may, by law,—
(a) authorise a Municipality to levy, collect and
appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in
accordance with such procedure and subject to such
limits;
(b) assign to a Municipality such taxes, duties,
tolls and fees levied and collected by the State
Government for such purposes and subject to such
conditions and limits;
(c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the
Municipalities from the Consolidated Fund of the
State; and
(d) provide for constitution of such Funds for
crediting all moneys received, respectively, by or on
behalf of the Municipalities and also for the
withdrawal of such moneys therefrom,
as may be specified in the law.

Finance
Commission.

243Y. (1) The Finance Commission constituted under
article 243-I shall also review the financial position of the
Municipalities and make recommendations to the
Governor as to—
(a) the principles which should govern—
(i) the distribution between the State and the
Municipalities of the net proceeds of the taxes,

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

145

(Part IXA.—The Municipalities.—Arts. 243Y—243ZB.)
duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State, which
may be divided between them under this Part
and the allocation between the Municipalities at
all levels of their respective shares of such
proceeds;
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls
and fees which may be assigned to, or
appropriated by, the Municipalities;
(iii) the grants-in-aid to the Municipalities
from the Consolidated Fund of the State;
(b) the measures needed to improve the financial
position of the Municipalities;
(c) any other matter referred to the Finance
Commission by the Governor in the interests of
sound finance of the Municipalities.
(2) The Governor shall cause every recommendation
made by the Commission under this article together with
an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken
thereon to be laid before the Legislature of the State.
243Z. The Legislature of a State may, by law, make
provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts
by the Municipalities and the auditing of such accounts.

Audit of accounts
of Municipalities.

243ZA. (1) The superintendence, direction and control
of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct
of, all elections to the Municipalities shall be vested in
the State Election Commission referred to in article 243K.

Elections to the
Municipalities.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the
Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with
respect to all matters relating to, or in connection with,
elections to the Municipalities.
243ZB. The provisions of this Part shall apply to the
Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union
territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor
of a State were references to the Administrator of the
Union territory appointed under article 239 and references
to the Legislature or the Legislative Assembly of a State
were references in relation to a Union territory having a

Application to
Union territories.

146

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IXA.—The Municipalities.—Arts. 243ZB—243ZD.)
Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly:
Provided that the President may, by public
notification, direct that the provisions of this Part shall
apply to any Union territory or part thereof subject to
such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in
the notification.
Part not to apply
to certain areas.

243ZC. (1) Nothing in this Part shall apply to the
Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal
areas referred to in clause (2), of article 244.
(2) Nothing in this Part shall be construed to affect
the functions and powers of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill
Council constituted under any law for the time being in
force for the hill areas of the district of Darjeeling in the
State of West Bengal.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,
Parliament may, by law, extend the provisions of this
Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred
to in clause (1) subject to such exceptions and
modifications as may be specified in such law, and no
such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of this
Constitution for the purposes of article 368.

Committee for
district planning.

243ZD. (1) There shall be constituted in every State
at the district level a District Planning Committee to
consolidate the plans prepared by the Panchayats and
the Municipalities in the district and to prepare a draft
development plan for the district as a whole.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make
provision with respect to—
(a) the composition of the District Planning
Committees;
(b) the manner in which the seats in such
Committees shall be filled:
Provided that not less than four-fifths of the total
number of members of such Committee shall be
elected by, and from amongst, the elected members
of the Panchayat at the district level and of the
Municipalities in the district in proportion to the ratio

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

147

(Part IXA.—The Municipalities.—Arts. 243ZD-243ZE.)
between the population of the rural areas and of the
urban areas in the district;
(c) the functions relating to district planning which
may be assigned to such Committees;
(d) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such
Committees shall be chosen.
(3) Every District Planning Committee shall, in
preparing the draft development plan,—
(a) have regard to—
(i) matters of common interest between the
Panchayats and the Municipalities including
spatial planning, sharing of water and other
physical and natural resources, the integrated
development of infrastructure and environmental
conservation;
(ii) the extent and type of available resources
whether financial or otherwise;
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as
the Governor may, by order, specify.
(4) The Chairperson of every District Planning
Committee shall forward the development plan, as
recommended by such Committee, to the Government
of the State.
243ZE. (1) There shall be constituted in every
Metropolitan area a Metropolitan Planning Committee to
prepare a draft development plan for the Metropolitan
area as a whole.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make
provision with respect to—
(a) the composition of the Metropolitan Planning
Committees;
(b) the manner in which the seats in such
Committees shall be filled:
Provided that not less than two-thirds of the
members of such Committee shall be elected by,
and from amongst, the elected members of the
Municipalities and Chairpersons of the Panchayats in
the Metropolitan area in proportion to the ratio

Committee for
Metropolitan
planning.

148

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IXA.—The Municipalities.—Art. 243ZE.)
between the population of the Municipalities and of the
Panchayats in that area;
(c) the representation in such Committees of the
Government of India and the Government of the State
and of such organisations and Institutions as may be
deemed necessary for carrying out the functions
assigned to such Committees;
(d) the functions relating to planning and
coordination for the Metropolitan area which may
be assigned to such Committees;
(e) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such
Committees shall be chosen.
(3) Every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall, in
preparing the draft development plan,—
(a) have regard to—
(i) the plans prepared by the Municipalities
and the Panchayats in the Metropolitan area;
(ii) matters of common interest between the
Municipalities and the Panchayats, including
co-ordinated spatial planning of the area, sharing
of water and other physical and natural resources,
the integrated development of infrastructure and
environmental conservation;
(iii) the overall objectives and priorities set by
the Government of India and the Government of
the State;
(iv) the extent and nature of investments likely
to be made in the Metropolitan area by agencies
of the Government of India and of the Government
of the State and other available resources whether
financial or otherwise;
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as
the Governor may, by order, specify.
(4) The Chairperson of every Metropolitan Planning
Committee shall forward the development plan, as
recommended by such Committee, to the Government of
the State.

149

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part IXA.—The Municipalities.—Arts. 243ZF-243ZG.)
243ZF. Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any
provision of any law relating to Municipalities in force
in a State immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992,
which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Part,
shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority
or until the expiration of one year from such
commencement, whichever is earlier:

Continuance of
existing laws and
Municipalities.

Provided that all the Municipalities existing
immediately before such commencement shall continue
till the expiration of their duration, unless sooner
dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the
Legislative Assembly of that State or, in the case of a
State having a Legislative Council, by each House of the
Legislature of that State.
243ZG. Notwithstanding
Constitution,—

anything

in

this

(a) the validity of any law relating to the
delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats
to such constituencies, made or purporting to be
made under article 243ZA shall not be called in
question in any court;
(b) no election to any Municipality shall be called
in question except by an election petition presented
to such authority and in such manner as is provided
for by or under any law made by the Legislature of
a State.]

Bar to interference
by courts in
electoral matters.

PART X
THE SCHEDULED AND TRIBAL AREAS
Administration of
Scheduled Areas
and Tribal Areas.

244. (1) The provisions of the Fifth Schedule shall
apply to the administration and control of the Scheduled
Areas and Scheduled Tribes in any State 1*** other than
2
[the States of Assam 3[, 4[Meghalaya, Tripura and
Mizoram]]].
(2) The provisions of the Sixth Schedule shall apply
to the administration of the tribal areas in 2[the States of
Assam 3[, 5[Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram]]].

Formation of an
autonomous State
comprising certain
tribal areas in
Assam and creation
of local Legislature
or Council of
Ministers or both
therefor.

6

[244A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution, Parliament may, by law, form within the
State of Assam an autonomous State comprising (whether
wholly or in part) all or any of the tribal areas specified
in 7[Part I] of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the
Sixth Schedule and create therefor—
(a) a body, whether elected or partly nominated
and partly elected, to function as a Legislature for
the autonomous State, or
(b) a Council of Ministers,
or both with such constitution, powers and functions, in
each case, as may be specified in the law.

1
The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2
Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for
“the State of Assam” (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2, for “and Meghalaya”
(w.e.f. 1-4-1985).
4
Subs. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39, for “Meghalaya and
Tripura” (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
5
Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for “Meghalaya and Tripura and the Union Territory of
Mizoram”(w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
6
Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 2.
7
Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for
“Part A” (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).

150

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part X.—The Scheduled and Tribal Areas.—Art. 244A.)
(2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) may,
in particular,—
(a) specify the matters enumerated in the State
List or the Concurrent List with respect to which the
Legislature of the autonomous State shall have power
to make laws for the whole or any part thereof,
whether to the exclusion of the Legislature of the
State of Assam or otherwise;
(b) define the matters with respect to which the
executive power of the autonomous State shall
extend;
(c) provide that any tax levied by the State of
Assam shall be assigned to the autonomous State in
so far as the proceeds thereof are attributable to the
autonomous State;
(d) provide that any reference to a State in any
article of this Constitution shall be construed as
including a reference to the autonomous State; and
(e) make such supplemental, incidental and
consequential provisions as may be deemed
necessary.
(3) An amendment of any such law as aforesaid in
so far as such amendment relates to any of the matters
specified in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) of clause (2)
shall have no effect unless the amendment is passed in
each House of Parliament by not less than two-thirds of
the members present and voting.
(4) Any such law as is referred to in this article shall
not be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution
for the purposes of article 368 notwithstanding that it
contains any provision which amends or has the effect
of amending this Constitution.]

151

PART XI
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND
THE STATES
CHAPTER I.—LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS
Distribution of Legislative Powers
Extent of laws
made by
Parliament and
by the
Legislatures of
States.

245. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
Parliament may make laws for the whole or any part of
the territory of India, and the Legislature of a State may
make laws for the whole or any part of the State.

Subject-matter of
laws made by
Parliament and by
the Legislatures of
States.

246. (1) Notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and
(3), Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with
respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in the
Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the
“Union List”).

(2) No law made by Parliament shall be deemed to be
invalid on the ground that it would have extra-territorial
operation.

(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (3),
Parliament, and, subject to clause (1), the Legislature of
any State 1*** also, have power to make laws with respect
to any of the matters enumerated in List III in the Seventh
Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the
“Concurrent List”).
(3) Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of
any State 1*** has exclusive power to make laws for such
State or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters
enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule (in this
Constitution referred to as the “State List”).
(4) Parliament has power to make laws with respect
to any matter for any part of the territory of India not
included 2[in a State] notwithstanding that such matter is
a matter enumerated in the State List.
1
The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2
Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for “ in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule”.

152

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

153

(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States.—
Arts. 247—249.)
247. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter,
Parliament may by law provide for the establishment of
any additional courts for the better administration of
laws made by Parliament or of any existing laws with
respect to a matter enumerated in the Union List.

Power of
Parliament to
provide for the
establishment of
certain additional
courts.

248. (1) Parliament has exclusive power to make any
law with respect to any matter not enumerated in the
Concurrent List or State List.

Residuary powers
of legislation.

(2) Such power shall include the power of making
any law imposing a tax not mentioned in either of those
Lists.
249. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing
provisions of this Chapter, if the Council of States has
declared by resolution supported by not less than twothirds of the members present and voting that it is
necessary or expedient in the national interest that
Parliament should make laws with respect to any matter
enumerated in the State List specified in the resolution,
it shall be lawful for Parliament to make laws for the
whole or any part of the territory of India with respect
to that matter while the resolution remains in force.
(2) A resolution passed under clause (1) shall remain
in force for such period not exceeding one year as may
be specified therein:
Provided that, if and so often as a resolution approving
the continuance in force of any such resolution
is passed in the manner provided in clause (1), such
resolution shall continue in force for a further period of
one year from the date on which under this clause it
would otherwise have ceased to be in force.
(3) A law made by Parliament which Parliament
would not but for the passing of a resolution under clause
(1) have been competent to make shall, to the extent of
the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration
of a period of six months after the resolution has ceased
to be in force, except as respects things done or omitted
to be done before the expiration of the said period.

Power of
Parliament to
legislate with
respect to a
matter in the
State List in the
national interest.

154

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States.—
Arts. 250—252.)
Power of
Parliament to
legislate with
respect to any
matter in the State
List if a
Proclamation of
Emergency is in
operation.

250. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter,
Parliament shall, while a Proclamation of Emergency is
in operation, have power to make laws for the whole or
any part of the territory of India with respect to any of the
matters enumerated in the State List.

Inconsistency
between laws
made by
Parliament under
articles 249 and
250 and laws
made by the
Legislatures of
States.

251. Nothing in articles 249 and 250 shall restrict the
power of the Legislature of a State to make any law
which under this Constitution it has power to make, but
if any provision of a law made by the Legislature of a
State is repugnant to any provision of a law made by
Parliament which Parliament has under either of the said
articles power to make, the law made by Parliament,
whether passed before or after the law made by the
Legislature of the State, shall prevail, and the law made
by the Legislature of the State shall to the extent of the
repugnancy, but so long only as the law made by
Parliament continues to have effect, be inoperative.

Power of
Parliament to
legislate for two
or more States by
consent and
adoption of such
legislation by any
other State.

252. (1) If it appears to the Legislatures of two or more
States to be desirable that any of the matters with respect
to which Parliament has no power to make laws for the
States except as provided in articles 249 and 250 should
be regulated in such States by Parliament by law, and if
resolutions to that effect are passed by all the Houses of
the Legislatures of those States, it shall be lawful for
Parliament to pass an Act for regulating that matter
accordingly, and any Act so passed shall apply to such
States and to any other State by which it is adopted
afterwards by resolution passed in that behalf by the
House or, where there are two Houses, by each of the
Houses of the Legislature of that State.

(2) A law made by Parliament which Parliament
would not but for the issue of a Proclamation of
Emergency have been competent to make shall, to the
extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the
expiration of a period of six months after the Proclamation
has ceased to operate, except as respects things done or
omitted to be done before the expiration of the said
period.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

155

(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States.—
Arts. 252—254.)
(2) Any Act so passed by Parliament may be amended
or repealed by an Act of Parliament passed or adopted in
like manner but shall not, as respects any State to which
it applies, be amended or repealed by an Act of the
Legislature of that State.
253. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing
provisions of this Chapter, Parliament has power to make
any law for the whole or any part of the territory of India
for implementing any treaty, agreement or convention
with any other country or countries or any decision made
at any international conference, association or other body.

Legislation for
giving effect to
international
agreements.

254. (1) If any provision of a law made by the
Legislature of a State is repugnant to any provision of a
law made by Parliament which Parliament is competent
to enact, or to any provision of an existing law with
respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent
List, then, subject to the provisions of clause (2), the law
made by Parliament, whether passed before or after the
law made by the Legislature of such State, or, as the case
may be, the existing law, shall prevail and the law made
by the Legislature of the State shall, to the extent of the
repugnancy, be void.

Inconsistency
between laws
made by
Parliament and
laws made by the
Legislatures of
States.

(2) Where a law made by the Legislature of a State
*** with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the
Concurrent List contains any provision repugnant to the
provisions of an earlier law made by Parliament or an
existing law with respect to that matter, then, the law so
made by the Legislature of such State shall, if it has been
reserved for the consideration of the President and has
received his assent, prevail in that State:
1

Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent
Parliament from enacting at any time any law with respect
to the same matter including a law adding to, amending,
varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislature
of the State.
1
The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.

156

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States.—
Arts. 255—257.)
Requirements as to
recommendations
and previous
sanctions to be
regarded as matters
of procedure only.

255. No Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of a
State 1***, and no provision in any such Act, shall be
invalid by reason only that some recommendation or
previous sanction required by this Constitution was not
given, if assent to that Act was given—
(a) where the recommendation required was that
of the Governor, either by the Governor or by the
President;
(b) where the recommendation required was that
of the Rajpramukh, either by the Rajpramukh or by
the President;
(c) where the recommendation or previous
sanction required was that of the President, by the
President.
CHAPTER II.—ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS
General

Obligation of
States and the
Union.

256. The executive power of every State shall be so
exercised as to ensure compliance with the laws made by
Parliament and any existing laws which apply in that
State, and the executive power of the Union shall extend
to the giving of such directions to a State as may appear
to the Government of India to be necessary for that
purpose.

Control of the
Union over States
in certain cases.

257. (1) The executive power of every State shall be so
exercised as not to impede or prejudice the exercise of
the executive power of the Union, and the executive
power of the Union shall extend to the giving of such
directions to a State as may appear to the Government of
India to be necessary for that purpose.
(2) The executive power of the Union shall also
extend to the giving of directions to a State as to the
construction and maintenance of means of communication

1
The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

157

(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States.—
Arts. 257—258.)
declared in the direction to be of national or military
importance:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be taken
as restricting the power of Parliament to declare
highways or waterways to be national highways or
national waterways or the power of the Union with
respect to the highways or waterways so declared or the
power of the Union to construct and maintain means of
communication as part of its functions with respect to
naval, military and air force works.
(3) The executive power of the Union shall also
extend to the giving of directions to a State as to the
measures to be taken for the protection of the railways
within the State.
(4) Where in carrying out any direction given to a
State under clause (2) as to the construction or
maintenance of any means of communication or under
clause (3) as to the measures to be taken for the protection
of any railway, costs have been incurred in excess of
those which would have been incurred in the discharge
of the normal duties of the State if such direction had
not been given, there shall be paid by the Government
of India to the State such sum as may be agreed, or, in
default of agreement, as may be determined by an
arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of India, in
respect of the extra costs so incurred by the State.
1

257A. [Assistance to States by deployment of armed forces
or other forces of the Union.] Rep. by the Constitution (Fortyfourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 33 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
258. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution, the President may, with the consent of the
Government of a State, entrust either conditionally or
unconditionally to that Government or to its officers
functions in relation to any matter to which the executive
power of the Union extends.
1

Power of the Union
to confer powers,
etc., on States in
certain cases.

Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 43 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

158

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States.—
Arts. 258—261.)
(2) A law made by Parliament which applies in any
State may, notwithstanding that it relates to a matter with
respect to which the Legislature of the State has no power
to make laws, confer powers and impose duties, or
authorise the conferring of powers and the imposition of
duties, upon the State or officers and authorities thereof.
(3) Where by virtue of this article powers and duties
have been conferred or imposed upon a State or officers
or authorities thereof, there shall be paid by the
Government of India to the State such sum as may be
agreed, or, in default of agreement, as may be determined
by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of India,
in respect of any extra costs of administration incurred
by the State in connection with the exercise of those
powers and duties.
Power of the
States to entrust
functions to the
Union.

1

[258A. Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution, the Governor of a State may, with the
consent of the Government of India, entrust either
conditionally or unconditionally to that Government or
to its officers functions in relation to any matter to which
the executive power of the State extends.]
259. [Armed Forces in States in Part B of the First
Schedule.] Rep. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.

Jurisdiction of the
Union in relation
to territories
outside India.

260. The Government of India may by agreement
with the Government of any territory not being part of
the territory of India undertake any executive, legislative
or judicial functions vested in the Government of such
territory, but every such agreement shall be subject to,
and governed by, any law relating to the exercise of
foreign jurisdiction for the time being in force.

Public acts, records
and judicial
proceedings.

261. (1) Full faith and credit shall be given throughout
the territory of India to public acts, records and judicial
proceedings of the Union and of every State.

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 18.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

159

(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States.—
Arts. 261—263.)
(2) The manner in which and the conditions under
which the acts, records and proceedings referred to in
clause (1) shall be proved and the effect thereof
determined shall be as provided by law made by
Parliament.
(3) Final judgments or orders delivered or passed by
civil courts in any part of the territory of India shall be
capable of execution anywhere within that territory
according to law.
Disputes relating to Waters
262. (1) Parliament may by law provide for the
adjudication of any dispute or complaint with respect to
the use, distribution or control of the waters of, or in, any
inter-State river or river valley.

Adjudication of
disputes relating
to waters of interState rivers or
river valleys.

(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,
Parliament may by law provide that neither the Supreme
Court nor any other court shall exercise jurisdiction in
respect of any such dispute or complaint as is referred to
in clause (1).
Co-ordination between States
263. If at any time it appears to the President that the
public interests would be served by the establishment of
a Council charged with the duty of—
(a) inquiring into and advising upon disputes
which may have arisen between States;
(b) investigating and discussing subjects in which
some or all of the States, or the Union and one or
more of the States, have a common interest; or
(c) making recommendations upon any such
subject and, in particular, recommendations for the
better co-ordination of policy and action with respect
to that subject,
it shall be lawful for the President by order to establish
such a Council, and to define the nature of the duties to
be performed by it and its organisation and procedure.

Provisions with
respect to an
inter-State
Council.

PART XII
FINANCE, PROPERTY, CONTRACTS AND SUITS
CHAPTER I.—FINANCE
General
1

Interpretation.

[264. In this Part, “Finance Commission” means a
Finance Commission constituted under article 280.]

Taxes not to be
imposed save by
authority of law.

265. No tax shall be levied or collected except by
authority of law.

Consolidated
Funds and public
accounts of India
and of the States.

266. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 267 and to
the provisions of this Chapter with respect to the
assignment of the whole or part of the net proceeds of
certain taxes and duties to States, all revenues received
by the Government of India, all loans raised by that
Government by the issue of treasury bills, loans or ways
and means advances and all moneys received by that
Government in repayment of loans shall form one
consolidated fund to be entitled “the Consolidated Fund
of India”, and all revenues received by the Government
of a State, all loans raised by that Government by the
issue of treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances
and all moneys received by that Government in
repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to
be entitled “the Consolidated Fund of the State”.
(2) All other public moneys received by or on behalf
of the Government of India or the Government of a State
shall be credited to the public account of India or the
public account of the State, as the case may be.
(3) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India
or the Consolidated Fund of a State shall be appropriated
except in accordance with law and for the purposes and
in the manner provided in this Constitution.

1

Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for art. 264.

160

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

161

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 267-268.)
267. (1) Parliament may by law establish a
Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be
entitled “the Contingency Fund of India” into which
shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be
determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be
placed at the disposal of the President to enable advances
to be made by him out of such Fund for the purposes of
meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation
of such expenditure by Parliament by law under
article 115 or article 116.

Contingency Fund.

(2) The Legislature of a State may by law establish
a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be
entitled “the Contingency Fund of the State” into which
shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be
determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be
placed at the disposal of the Governor 1***of the State
to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund
for the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure
pending authorisation of such expenditure by the
Legislature of the State by law under article 205 or
article 206.
Distribution of Revenues between the
Union and the States
268. (1) Such stamp duties and such duties of excise
on medicinal and toilet preparations as are mentioned in
the Union List shall be levied by the Government of
India but shall be collected—

Duties levied by
the Union but
collected and
appropriated by
the States.

(a) in the case where such duties are leviable
within any 2[Union territory], by the Government of
India, and
(b) in other cases, by the States within which such
duties are respectively leviable.
1
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2
Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for “State specified in Part C of the First Schedule”.

162

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 268-269.)
(2) The proceeds in any financial year of any such
duty leviable within any State shall not form part of the
Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to that
State.
Service tax levied by
Union and collected
and appropriated by
the Union and the
States.

*[268A. (1) Taxes on services shall be levied by the
Government of India and such tax shall be collected and
appropriated by the Government of India and the States
in the manner provided in clause (2).
(2) The proceeds in any financial year of any such tax
levied in accordance with the provisions of clause (1)
shall be—
(a) collected by the Government of India and the
States;
(b) appropriated by the Government of India and
the States,
in accordance with such principles of collection and
appropriation as may be formulated by Parliament by
law.]

Taxes levied and
collected by the
Union but assigned
to the States.

269. 1[(1) Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods and
taxes on the consignment of goods shall be levied and
collected by the Government of India but shall be assigned
and shall be deemed to have been assigned to the States
on or after the 1st day of April, 1996 in the manner
provided in clause (2).
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(a) the expression “taxes on the sale or purchase
of goods” shall mean taxes on sale or purchase of
goods other than newspapers, where such sale or
purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade
or commerce;
(b) the expression “taxes on the consignment of
goods” shall mean taxes on the consignment of goods
(whether the consignment is to the person making it
or to any other person), where such consignment
takes place in the course of inter-State trade or
commerce.

*Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (which is yet not in
force, date to be notified later on).
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2, for cls. (1) and (2).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

163

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 269-270.)
(2) The net proceeds in any financial year of any such
tax, except in so far as those proceeds represent proceeds
attributable to Union territories, shall not form part of the
Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to the
States within which that tax is leviable in that year, and
shall be distributed among those States in accordance
with such principles of distribution as may be formulated
by Parliament by law.]
1

[(3) Parliament may by law formulate principles for
determining when a 2[sale or purchase of, or consignment
of, goods] takes place in the course of inter-State trade or
commerce.]
3
[270. (1) All taxes and duties referred to in the Union
List, except the duties and taxes referred to in articles
*[268 and 269], respectively, surcharge on taxes and duties
referred to in article 271 and any cess levied for specific
purposes under any law made by Parliament shall be
levied and collected by the Government of India and
shall be distributed between the Union and the States in
the manner provided in clause (2).

Taxes levied and
distributed between
the Union and the
States.

(2) Such percentage, as may be prescribed, of the net
proceeds of any such tax or duty in any financial year
shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India,
but shall be assigned to the States within which that tax
or duty is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed
among those States in such manner and from such time
as may be prescribed in the manner provided in
clause (3).
(3) In this article, “prescribed” means,—
(i) until a Finance Commission has been
constituted, prescribed by the President by order,
and
(ii) after a Finance Commission has been
constituted, prescribed by the President by order
after considering the recommendations of the
Finance Commission.]
1

Ins. by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 3.
Subs by the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982, s. 2, for “sale or purchase
of goods”.
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 3, for art. 270 (w.e.f.
1-4-1996).
*The words and figures in brackets shall stand substituted as “articles 268, 268A and
269” by the Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3 (which is yet not in
force, date to be notified later on).
2

164

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 271—274.)
Surcharge on
certain duties and
taxes for purposes
of the Union.

271. Notwithstanding anything in articles 269 and
270, Parliament may at any time increase any of the
duties or taxes referred to in those articles by a surcharge
for purposes of the Union and the whole proceeds of any
such surcharge shall form part of the Consolidated Fund
of India.
272. [Taxes which are levied and collected by the Union
and may be distributed between the Union and the States.]
Rep. by the Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Act, 2000,
s. 4.

Grants in lieu of
export duty on jute
and jute products.

273. (1) There shall be charged on the Consolidated
Fund of India in each year as grants-in-aid of the revenues
of the States of Assam, Bihar, Orissa and West Bengal, in
lieu of assignment of any share of the net proceeds in
each year of export duty on jute and jute products to
those States, such sums as may be prescribed.
(2) The sums so prescribed shall continue to be
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India so long as
any export duty on jute or jute products continues to be
levied by the Government of India or until the expiration
of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution
whichever is earlier.
(3) In this article, the expression “prescribed” has
the same meaning as in article 270.

Prior
recommendation of
President required
to Bills affecting
taxation in which
States are
interested.

274. (1) No Bill or amendment which imposes or varies
any tax or duty in which States are interested, or
which varies the meaning of the expression “agricultural
income” as defined for the purposes of the enactments
relating to Indian income-tax, or which affects the principles
on which under any of the foregoing provisions of this
Chapter moneys are or may be distributable to States, or
which imposes any such surcharge for the purposes of
the Union as is mentioned in the foregoing provisions of
this Chapter, shall be introduced or moved in either
House of Parliament except on the recommendation of
the President.
(2) In this article, the expression “tax or duty in which
States are interested” means—
(a) a tax or duty the whole or part of the net
proceeds whereof are assigned to any State; or

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

165

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 274-275.)
(b) a tax or duty by reference to the net proceeds
whereof sums are for the time being payable out of
the Consolidated Fund of India to any State.
275. (1) Such sums as Parliament may by law provide
shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India in
each year as grants-in-aid of the revenues of such States
as Parliament may determine to be in need of assistance,
and different sums may be fixed for different States:

Grants from the
Union to certain
States.

Provided that there shall be paid out of the
Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the
revenues of a State such capital and recurring sums as
may be necessary to enable that State to meet the costs of
such schemes of development as may be undertaken by
the State with the approval of the Government of India
for the purpose of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled
Tribes in that State or raising the level of administration
of the Scheduled Areas therein to that of the
administration of the rest of the areas of that State:
Provided further that there shall be paid out of the
Consolidated Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the
revenues of the State of Assam sums, capital and recurring,
equivalent to—
(a) the average excess of expenditure over the
revenues during the two years immediately preceding
the commencement of this Constitution in respect of
the administration of the tribal areas specified in
1
[Part I] of the table appended to paragraph 20 of the
Sixth Schedule; and
(b) the costs of such schemes of development as
may be undertaken by that State with the approval
of the Government of India for the purpose of raising

1
Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for
“Part A” (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).

166

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Art. 275.)
the level of administration of the said areas to that of
the administration of the rest of the areas of that
State.
1

[(1A) On and from the formation of the autonomous
State under article 244A,—
(i) any sums payable under clause (a) of the
second proviso to clause (1) shall, if the
autonomous State comprises all the tribal areas
referred to therein, be paid to the autonomous State,
and, if the autonomous State comprises only some
of those tribal areas, be apportioned between the
State of Assam and the autonomous State as the
President may, by order, specify;
(ii) there shall be paid out of the Consolidated
Fund of India as grants-in-aid of the revenues of
the autonomous State sums, capital and recurring,
equivalent to the costs of such schemes of
development as may be undertaken by the
autonomous State with the approval of the
Government of India for the purpose of raising
the level of administration of that State to that
of the administration of the rest of the State of
Assam.]
(2) Until provision is made by Parliament under
clause (1), the powers conferred on Parliament under
that clause shall be exercisable by the President by order
and any order made by the President under this clause
shall have effect subject to any provision so made by
Parliament:
Provided that after a Finance Commission has been
constituted no order shall be made under this clause
by the President except after considering the
recommendations of the Finance Commission.

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 3.

167

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 276—278.)
276. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 246, no
law of the Legislature of a State relating to taxes for the
benefit of the State or of a municipality, district board,
local board or other local authority therein in respect of
professions, trades, callings or employments shall be
invalid on the ground that it relates to a tax on income.

Taxes on
professions, trades,
callings and
employments.

(2) The total amount payable in respect of any one
person to the State or to any one municipality, district
board, local board or other local authority in the State by
way of taxes on professions, trades, callings and
employments shall not exceed 1[two thousand and five
hundred rupees] per annum.
2

*

*

*

*

(3) The power of the Legislature of a State to make
laws as aforesaid with respect to taxes on professions,
trades, callings and employments shall not be construed
as limiting in any way the power of Parliament to make
laws with respect to taxes on income accruing from or
arising out of professions, trades, callings and
employments.
277. Any taxes, duties, cesses or fees which,
immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution, were being lawfully levied by the
Government of any State or by any municipality or other
local authority or body for the purposes of the State,
municipality, district or other local area may,
notwithstanding that those taxes, duties, cesses or fees
are mentioned in the Union List, continue to be levied
and to be applied to the same purposes until provision
to the contrary is made by Parliament by law.

Savings.

278. [Agreement with States in Part B of the First
Schedule with regard to certain financial matters.] Rep. by the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Sixtieth Amendment) Act, 1988, s. 2, for “two hundred and
fifty rupees”.
2
Proviso omitted by s. 2, ibid.

168

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 279-280.)
Calculation of “net
proceeds”, etc.

279. (1) In the foregoing provisions of this Chapter,
“net proceeds” means in relation to any tax or duty the
proceeds thereof reduced by the cost of collection, and for
the purposes of those provisions the net proceeds of any
tax or duty, or of any part of any tax or duty, in or
attributable to any area shall be ascertained and certified
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, whose
certificate shall be final.
(2) Subject as aforesaid, and to any other express
provision of this Chapter, a law made by Parliament or
an order of the President may, in any case where under
this Part the proceeds of any duty or tax are, or may be,
assigned to any State, provide for the manner in which
the proceeds are to be calculated, for the time from or at
which and the manner in which any payments are to be
made, for the making of adjustments between one
financial year and another, and for any other incidental
or ancillary matters.

Finance
Commission.

280. (1) The President shall, within two years from
the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter at
the expiration of every fifth year or at such earlier time
as the President considers necessary, by order constitute
a Finance Commission which shall consist of a
Chairman and four other members to be appointed by
the President.
(2) Parliament may by law determine the
qualifications which shall be requisite for appointment
as members of the Commission and the manner in which
they shall be selected.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make
recommendations to the President as to—
(a) the distribution between the Union and the
States of the net proceeds of taxes which are to be, or
may be, divided between them under this Chapter
and the allocation between the States of the respective
shares of such proceeds;
(b) the principles which should govern the grantsin-aid of the revenues of the States out of the
Consolidated Fund of India;

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

169

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 280—283.)
1
[(bb) the measures needed to augment the
Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the
resources of the Panchayats in the State on the basis
of the recommendations made by the Finance
Commission of the State;]
2

[(c) the measures needed to augment the
Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the
resources of the Municipalities in the State on the
basis of the recommendations made by the Finance
Commission of the State;]
3

[(d)] any other matter referred to the Commission
by the President in the interests of sound finance.
(4) The Commission shall determine their procedure
and shall have such powers in the performance of their
functions as Parliament may by law confer on them.
281. The President shall cause every recommendation
made by the Finance Commission under the provisions of
this Constitution together with an explanatory
memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid
before each House of Parliament.

Recommendations
of the Finance
Commission.

Miscellaneous Financial Provisions
282. The Union or a State may make any grants for
any public purpose, notwithstanding that the purpose is
not one with respect to which Parliament or the
Legislature of the State, as the case may be, may make
laws.

Expenditure
defrayable by the
Union or a State
out of its revenues.

283. (1) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of
India and the Contingency Fund of India, the payment
of moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal of moneys
therefrom, the custody of public moneys other than those
credited to such Funds received by or on behalf of the
Government of India, their payment into the public
account of India and the withdrawal of moneys from
such account and all other matters connected with or

Custody, etc., of
Consolidated
Funds, Contingency
Funds and moneys
credited to the
public accounts.

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 3 (w.e.f. 24-4-1993).
Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-6-1993).
3
Sub-clause (c) re-lettered as sub-clause (d) by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-6-1993).
2

170

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 283—285.)
ancillary to matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law
made by Parliament, and, until provision in that behalf
is so made, shall be regulated by rules made by the
President.
(2) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of a State
and the Contingency Fund of a State, the payment of
moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal of moneys
therefrom, the custody of public moneys other than those
credited to such Funds received by or on behalf of the
Government of the State, their payment into the public
account of the State and the withdrawal of moneys from
such account and all other matters connected with or
ancillary to matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law
made by the Legislature of the State, and, until provision
in that behalf is so made, shall be regulated by rules
made by the Governor 1*** of the State.
Custody of
suitors’ deposits
and other moneys
received by public
servants and
courts.

284. All moneys received by or deposited with—
(a) any officer employed in connection with the
affairs of the Union or of a State in his capacity as
such, other than revenues or public moneys raised
or received by the Government of India or the
Government of the State, as the case may be, or
(b) any court within the territory of India to the
credit of any cause, matter, account or persons,
shall be paid into the public account of India or the
public account of State, as the case may be.

Exemption of
property of the
Union from State
taxation.

285. (1) The property of the Union shall, save in so
far as Parliament may by law otherwise provide, be exempt
from all taxes imposed by a State or by any authority
within a State.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall, until Parliament by
law otherwise provides, prevent any authority within a
State from levying any tax on any property of the Union
to which such property was immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution liable or treated as
liable, so long as that tax continues to be levied in that
State.

1
The words “or Rajpramukh“ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.

171

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 286-287.)
286. (1) No law of a State shall impose, or authorise
the imposition of, a tax on the sale or purchase of goods
where such sale or purchase takes place—

Restrictions as to
imposition of tax
on the sale or
purchase of goods.

(a) outside the State; or
(b) in the course of the import of the goods into,
or export of the goods out of, the territory of India.
1

*

*

*

*

2

[(2) Parliament may by law formulate principles for
determining when a sale or purchase of goods takes place
in any of the ways mentioned in clause (1).
3

[(3) Any law of a State shall, in so far as it imposes,
or authorises the imposition of,—
(a) a tax on the sale or purchase of goods declared
by Parliament by law to be of special importance in
inter-State trade or commerce; or
(b) a tax on the sale or purchase of goods, being
a tax of the nature referred to in sub-clause (b), subclause (c) or sub-clause (d) of clause (29A) of
article 366,
be subject to such restrictions and conditions in regard to
the system of levy, rates and other incidents of the tax as
Parliament may by law specify.]]
287. Save in so far as Parliament may by law
otherwise provide, no law of a State shall impose, or
authorise the imposition of, a tax on the consumption or
sale of electricity (whether produced by a Government or
other persons) which is—

Exemption from
taxes on electricity.

(a) consumed by the Government of India, or sold
to the Government of India for consumption by that
Government; or
(b) consumed in the construction, maintenance
or operation of any railway by the Government of
India or a railway company operating that railway,
or sold to that Government or any such railway
1

Explanation to cl. (1) omitted by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 4.
Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for cls. (2) and (3).
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982, s. 3, for cl. (3).
2

172

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 287—289.)
company for consumption in the construction,
maintenance or operation of any railway,
and any such law imposing, or authorising the
imposition of, a tax on the sale of electricity shall secure
that the price of electricity sold to the Government of
India for consumption by that Government, or to any
such railway company as aforesaid for consumption in
the construction, maintenance or operation of any railway,
shall be less by the amount of the tax than the price
charged to other consumers of a substantial quantity of
electricity.
Exemption from
taxation by States
in respect of water
or electricity in
certain cases.

288. (1) Save in so far as the President may by order
otherwise provide, no law of a State in force immediately
before the commencement of this Constitution shall
impose, or authorise the imposition of, a tax in respect of
any water or electricity stored, generated, consumed,
distributed or sold by any authority established by any
existing law or any law made by Parliament for regulating
or developing any inter-State river or river-valley.
Explanation.—The expression “law of a State in force”
in this clause shall include a law of a State passed or
made before the commencement of this Constitution and
not previously repealed, notwithstanding that it or parts
of it may not be then in operation either at all or in
particular areas.
(2) The Legislature of a State may by law impose, or
authorise the imposition of, any such tax as is mentioned
in clause (1), but no such law shall have any effect unless
it has, after having been reserved for the consideration of
the President, received his assent; and if any such law
provides for the fixation of the rates and other incidents
of such tax by means of rules or orders to be made under
the law by any authority, the law shall provide for the
previous consent of the President being obtained to the
making of any such rule or order.

Exemption of
property and
income of a State
from Union
taxation.

289. (1) The property and income of a State shall be
exempt from Union taxation.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the Union
from imposing, or authorising the imposition of, any tax
to such extent, if any, as Parliament may by law provide

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

173

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 289—290A.)
in respect of a trade or business of any kind carried on
by, or on behalf of, the Government of a State, or any
operations connected therewith, or any property used or
occupied for the purposes of such trade or business, or
any income accruing or arising in connection therewith.
(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall apply to any trade or
business, or to any class of trade or business, which
Parliament may by law declare to be incidental to the
ordinary functions of Government.
290. Where under the provisions of this Constitution
the expenses of any court or Commission, or the pension
payable to or in respect of a person who has served
before the commencement of this Constitution under the
Crown in India or after such commencement in connection
with the affairs of the Union or of a State, are charged on
the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund
of a State, then, if—

Adjustment in
respect of certain
expenses and
pensions.

(a) in the case of a charge on the Consolidated
Fund of India, the court or Commission serves any
of the separate needs of a State, or the person has
served wholly or in part in connection with the affairs
of a State; or
(b) in the case of a charge on the Consolidated
Fund of a State, the court or Commission serves any
of the separate needs of the Union or another State,
or the person has served wholly or in part in
connection with the affairs of the Union or another
State,
there shall be charged on and paid out of the
Consolidated Fund of the State or, as the case may be, the
Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of
the other State, such contribution in respect of the
expenses or pension as may be agreed, or as may in
default of agreement be determined by an arbitrator to be
appointed by the Chief Justice of India.
1

[290A. A sum of forty-six lakhs and fifty thousand
rupees shall be charged on, and paid out of, the
Consolidated Fund of the State of Kerala every year to
1

Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 19.

Annual payment to
certain Devaswom
Funds.

174

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 290A—293.)
the Travancore Devaswom Fund; and a sum of thirteen
lakhs and fifty thousand rupees shall be charged on, and
paid out of, the Consolidated Fund of the State of 1[Tamil
Nadu] every year to the Devaswom Fund established in
that State for the maintenance of Hindu temples and
shrines in the territories transferred to that State on the
1st day of November, 1956, from the State of TravancoreCochin.]
291. [Privy purse sums of Rulers.] Rep. by the Constitution
(Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 197l, s. 2.
CHAPTER II.—BORROWING
Borrowing by the
Government of
India.

292. The executive power of the Union extends to
borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of
India within such limits, if any, as may from time to time
be fixed by Parliament by law and to the giving of
guarantees within such limits, if any, as may be so fixed.

Borrowing by
States.

293. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, the
executive power of a State extends to borrowing within
the territory of India upon the security of the Consolidated
Fund of the State within such limits, if any, as may from
time to time be fixed by the Legislature of such State by
law and to the giving of guarantees within such limits,
if any, as may be so fixed.
(2) The Government of India may, subject to such
conditions as may be laid down by or under any law
made by Parliament, make loans to any State or, so long
as any limits fixed under article 292 are not exceeded,
give guarantees in respect of loans raised by any State,
and any sums required for the purpose of making such
loans shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
(3) A State may not without the consent of the
Government of India raise any loan if there is still
outstanding any part of a loan which has been made to
the State by the Government of India or by its predecessor
Government, or in respect of which a guarantee has been
given by the Government of India or by its predecessor
Government.

1
Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968 (53 of 1968), s. 4, for
“Madras” (w.e.f. 14-1-1969).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

175

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 293—295.)
(4) A consent under clause (3) may be granted subject
to such conditions, if any, as the Government of India
may think fit to impose.
CHAPTER III.—PROPERTY, CONTRACTS, RIGHTS,
LIABILITIES, OBLIGATIONS AND SUITS
294. As from the commencement of this
Constitution—
(a) all property and assets which immediately
before such commencement were vested in His
Majesty for the purposes of the Government of the
Dominion of India and all property and assets which
immediately before such commencement were vested
in His Majesty for the purposes of the Government
of each Governor’s Province shall vest respectively
in the Union and the corresponding State, and

Succession to
property, assets,
rights, liabilities
and obligations in
certain cases.

(b) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the
Government of the Dominion of India and of the
Government of each Governor’s Province, whether
arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the
rights, liabilities and obligations respectively of the
Government of India and the Government of each
corresponding State,
subject to any adjustment made or to be made by reason
of the creation before the commencement of this
Constitution of the Dominion of Pakistan or of the
Provinces of West Bengal, East Bengal, West Punjab and
East Punjab.
295. (1) As from the commencement of this
Constitution—
(a) all property and assets which immediately
before such commencement were vested in any
Indian State corresponding to a State specified in
Part B of the First Schedule shall vest in the Union,
if the purposes for which such property and assets
were held immediately before such commencement
will thereafter be purposes of the Union relating to
any of the matters enumerated in the Union List,
and

Succession to
property, assets,
rights, liabilities
and obligations in
other cases.

176

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 295-296.)
(b) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the
Government of any Indian State corresponding to a
State specified in Part B of the First Schedule, whether
arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the
rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government
of India, if the purposes for which such rights were
acquired or liabilities or obligations were incurred
before such commencement will thereafter be
purposes of the Government of India relating to any
of the matters enumerated in the Union List,
subject to any agreement entered into in that behalf by the
Government of India with the Government of that
State.
(2) Subject as aforesaid, the Government of each State
specified in Part B of the First Schedule shall, as from the
commencement of this Constitution, be the successor of
the Government of the corresponding Indian State as
regards all property and assets and all rights, liabilities
and obligations, whether arising out of any contract or
otherwise, other than those referred to in clause (1).
Property accruing
by escheat or lapse
or as bona vacantia.

296. Subject as hereinafter provided, any property in
the territory of India which, if this Constitution had not
come into operation, would have accrued to His Majesty
or, as the case may be, to the Ruler of an Indian State by
escheat or lapse, or as bona vacantia for want of a rightful
owner, shall, if it is property situate in a State, vest in
such State, and shall, in any other case, vest in the Union:
Provided that any property which at the date when
it would have so accrued to His Majesty or to the Ruler
of an Indian State was in the possession or under the
control of the Government of India or the Government
of a State shall, according as the purposes for which it
was then used or held were purposes of the Union or of
a State, vest in the Union or in that State.
Explanation.—In this article, the expressions “Ruler”
and “Indian State” have the same meanings as in
article 363.

177

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 297—299.)
1

[297. (1) All lands, minerals and other things of value
underlying the ocean within the territorial waters, or the
continental shelf, or the exclusive economic zone, of India
shall vest in the Union and be held for the purposes of
the Union.
(2) All other resources of the exclusive economic zone
of India shall also vest in the Union and be held for the
purposes of the Union.

Things of value
within territorial
waters or
continental shelf
and resources of
the exclusive
economic zone to
vest in the Union.

(3) The limits of the territorial waters, the continental
shelf, the exclusive economic zone, and other maritime
zones, of India shall be such as may be specified, from
time to time, by or under any law made by Parliament.]
2

[298. The executive power of the Union and of each
State shall extend to the carrying on of any trade or
business and to the acquisition, holding and disposal of
property and the making of contracts for any purpose:

Power to carry on
trade, etc.

Provided that—
(a) the said executive power of the Union shall, in
so far as such trade or business or such purpose is
not one with respect to which Parliament may make
laws, be subject in each State to legislation by the
State; and
(b) the said executive power of each State shall,
in so far as such trade or business or such purpose
is not one with respect to which the State Legislature
may make laws, be subject to legislation by
Parliament.]
299. (1) All contracts made in the exercise of the
executive power of the Union or of a State shall be
expressed to be made by the President, or by the
Governor 3*** of the State, as the case may be, and all
such contracts and all assurances of property made in
the exercise of that power shall be executed on behalf of

Contracts.

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Fortieth Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 2, for art. 297 (w.e.f.
27-5-1976).
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 20, for art. 298.
3
The words “or the Rajpramukh“ omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.

178

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits.—
Arts. 299—300A.)
the President or the Governor 1*** by such persons and in
such manner as he may direct or authorise.
(2) Neither the President nor the Governor 2*** shall
be personally liable in respect of any contract or assurance
made or executed for the purposes of this Constitution,
or for the purposes of any enactment relating to the
Government of India heretofore in force, nor shall any
person making or executing any such contract or
assurance on behalf of any of them be personally liable
in respect thereof.
Suits and
proceedings.

300. (1) The Government of India may sue or be sued
by the name of the Union of India and the Government
of a State may sue or be sued by the name of the State and
may, subject to any provisions which may be made by
Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of such State
enacted by virtue of powers conferred by this Constitution,
sue or be sued in relation to their respective affairs in the
like cases as the Dominion of India and the corresponding
Provinces or the corresponding Indian States might have
sued or been sued if this Constitution had not been
enacted.
(2) If at the commencement of this Constitution—
(a) any legal proceedings are pending to which
the Dominion of India is a party, the Union of India
shall be deemed to be substituted for the Dominion
in those proceedings; and
(b) any legal proceedings are pending to which a
Province or an Indian State is a party, the
corresponding State shall be deemed to be substituted
for the Province or the Indian State in those
proceedings.
3

Persons not to be
deprived of
property save by
authority of law.

[CHAPTER IV.—RIGHT TO PROPERTY

300A. No person shall be deprived of his property
save by authority of law.]

1
The words “or the Rajpramukh“ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2
The words “nor the Rajpramukh“ omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.
3
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 34 (w.e.f.
20-6-1979).

PART XIII
TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE
WITHIN THE TERRITORY OF INDIA
301. Subject to the other provisions of this Part, trade,
commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of
India shall be free.

Freedom of trade,
commerce and
intercourse.

302. Parliament may by law impose such restrictions
on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse
between one State and another or within any part of the
territory of India as may be required in the public interest.

Power of
Parliament to
impose restrictions
on trade, commerce
and intercourse.

303. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 302,
neither Parliament nor the Legislature of a State shall
have power to make any law giving, or authorising the
giving of, any preference to one State over another, or
making, or authorising the making of, any discrimination
between one State and another, by virtue of any entry
relating to trade and commerce in any of the Lists in the
Seventh Schedule.

Restrictions on the
legislative powers
of the Union and
of the States with
regard to trade
and commerce.

(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent Parliament
from making any law giving, or authorising the giving
of, any preference or making, or authorising the making
of, any discrimination if it is declared by such law that
it is necessary to do so for the purpose of dealing with
a situation arising from scarcity of goods in any part of
the territory of India.
304. Notwithstanding anything in article 301 or article
303, the Legislature of a State may by law—
(a) impose on goods imported from other States
[or the Union territories] any tax to which similar
goods manufactured or produced in that State are
subject, so, however, as not to discriminate between
goods so imported and goods so manufactured or
produced; and

Restrictions on
trade, commerce
and intercourse
among States.

1

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.

179

180

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIII.—Trade, Commerce and Intercourse within the
Territory of India.—Arts. 304—307.)
(b) impose such reasonable restrictions on the
freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse with or
within that State as may be required in the public
interest:
Provided that no Bill or amendment for the purposes
of clause (b) shall be introduced or moved in the
Legislature of a State without the previous sanction of
the President.
Saving of existing
laws and laws
providing for State
monopolies.

1

[305. Nothing in articles 301 and 303 shall affect
the provisions of any existing law except in so far as the
President may by order otherwise direct; and nothing in
article 301 shall affect the operation of any law made
before the commencement of the Constitution (Fourth
Amendment) Act, 1955, in so far as it relates to, or prevent
Parliament or the Legislature of a State from making any
law relating to, any such matter as is referred to in subclause (ii) of clause (6) of article 19.]
306. [Power of certain States in Part B of the First Schedule
to impose restrictions on trade and commerce.] Rep. by the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.

Appointment of
authority for
carrying out the
purposes of articles
301 to 304.

1

307. Parliament may by law appoint such authority
as it considers appropriate for carrying out the purposes
of articles 301, 302, 303 and 304, and confer on the
authority so appointed such powers and such duties as
it thinks necessary.

Subs. by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 4, for art. 305.

PART XIV
SERVICES UNDER THE UNION AND THE STATES
CHAPTER I.—SERVICES
308. In this Part, unless the context otherwise
requires, the expression “State” 1[does not include the
State of Jammu and Kashmir].

Interpretation.

309. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
Acts of the appropriate Legislature may regulate the
recruitment, and conditions of service of persons
appointed, to public services and posts in connection
with the affairs of the Union or of any State:

Recruitment and
conditions of
service of persons
serving the Union
or a State.

Provided that it shall be competent for the President
or such person as he may direct in the case of services
and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union,
and for the Governor 2*** of a State or such person as he
may direct in the case of services and posts in connection
with the affairs of the State, to make rules regulating the
recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons
appointed, to such services and posts until provision in
that behalf is made by or under an Act of the appropriate
Legislature under this article, and any rules so made
shall have effect subject to the provisions of any such
Act.
310. (1) Except as expressly provided by this
Constitution, every person who is a member of a defence
service or of a civil service of the Union or of an
all-India service or holds any post connected with defence
or any civil post under the Union holds office during the
pleasure of the President, and every person who is a
member of a civil service of a State or holds any civil
post under a State holds office during the pleasure of
the Governor 3*** of the State.

Tenure of office of
persons serving the
Union or a State.

(2) Notwithstanding that a person holding a civil
post under the Union or a State holds office during the
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for “means
a State specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule”.
2
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.
3
The words “or, as the case may be, the Rajpramukh” omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.

181

182

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States.—
Arts. 310—311.)
pleasure of the President or, as the case may be, of the
Governor 1*** of the State, any contract under which a
person, not being a member of a defence service or of an
all-India service or of a civil service of the Union or a
State, is appointed under this Constitution to hold such
a post may, if the President or the Governor 2***, as the
case may be, deems it necessary in order to secure the
services of a person having special qualifications, provide
for the payment to him of compensation, if before the
expiration of an agreed period that post is abolished or
he is, for reasons not connected with any misconduct on
his part, required to vacate that post.
Dismissal, removal
or reduction in rank
of persons
employed in civil
capacities under the
Union or a State.

311. (1) No person who is a member of a civil service
of the Union or an all-India service or a civil service
of a State or holds a civil post under the Union or a
State shall be dismissed or removed by an authority
subordinate to that by which he was appointed.
3
[(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed
or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in
which he has been informed of the charges against him
and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
respect of those charges 4***:
5

[Provided that where it is proposed after such
inquiry, to impose upon him any such penalty, such
penalty may be imposed on the basis of the evidence
adduced during such inquiry and it shall not be necessary
to give such person any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed:
Provided further that this clause shall not apply—]
(a) where a person is dismissed or removed or
reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has
led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or
1
The words “or the Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2
The words “or the Rajpramukh” omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 10, for cls. (2) and (3).
4
Certain words omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 44
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
5
Subs. by s. 44, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

183

(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States.—
Arts. 311—312.)
(b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or
remove a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied
that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority
in writing, it is not reasonably practicable to hold
such inquiry; or
(c) where the President or the Governor, as the
case may be, is satisfied that in the interest of the
security of the State it is not expedient to hold such
inquiry.
(3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a
question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to hold
such inquiry as is referred to in clause (2), the decision
thereon of the authority empowered to dismiss or remove
such person or to reduce him in rank shall be final.]
312. (1) Notwithstanding anything in 1[Chapter VI of
Part VI or Part XI], if the Council of States has declared
by resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the
members present and voting that it is necessary or
expedient in the national interest so to do, Parliament
may by law provide for the creation of one or more all
India services 2[(including an all-India judicial service)]
common to the Union and the States, and, subject to the
other provisions of this Chapter, regulate the recruitment,
and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to
any such service.

All-India services.

(2) The services known at the commencement of this
Constitution as the Indian Administrative Service and
the Indian Police Service shall be deemed to be services
created by Parliament under this article.
2
[(3) The all-India judicial service referred to in clause
(1) shall not include any post inferior to that of a district
judge as defined in article 236.

(4) The law providing for the creation of the
all-India judicial service aforesaid may contain such
provisions for the amendment of Chapter VI of Part VI
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 45, for “Part XI”
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2
Ins. by s. 45, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

184

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States.—
Arts. 312—312A.)
as may be necessary for giving effect to the provisions of
that law and no such law shall be deemed to be an
amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of
article 368.]
Power of
Parliament to vary
or revoke
conditions of
service of officers
of certain services.

1

[312A. (1) Parliament may by law—

(a) vary or revoke, whether prospectively or
retrospectively, the conditions of services as respects
remuneration, leave and pension and the rights as
respects disciplinary matters of persons who, having
been appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary
of State in Council to a civil service of the Crown in
India before the commencement of this Constitution,
continue on and after the commencement of the
Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972,
to serve under the Government of India or of a State
in any service or post;
(b) vary or revoke, whether prospectively or
retrospectively, the conditions of service as respects
pension of persons who, having been appointed by
the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council
to a civil service of the Crown in India before the
commencement of this Constitution, retired or
otherwise ceased to be in service at any time before
the commencement of the Constitution (Twentyeighth Amendment) Act, 1972:
Provided that in the case of any such person who is
holding or has held the office of the Chief Justice or other
Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court, the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, the Chairman
or other member of the Union or a State Public Service
Commission or the Chief Election Commissioner, nothing
in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) shall be construed as
empowering Parliament to vary or revoke, after his
appointment to such post, the conditions of his service to
his disadvantage except in so far as such conditions of
service are applicable to him by reason of his being
a person appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary
of State in Council to a civil service of the Crown in
India.

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972, s. 2 (w.e.f. 29-8-1972).

185

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States.—
Arts. 312A—315.)
(2) Except to the extent provided for by Parliament
by law under this article, nothing in this article shall
affect the power of any Legislature or other authority
under any other provision of this Constitution to regulate
the conditions of service of persons referred to in
clause (1).
(3) Neither the Supreme Court nor any other court
shall have jurisdiction in—
(a) any dispute arising out of any provision of, or
any endorsement on, any covenant, agreement or
other similar instrument which was entered into or
executed by any person referred to in clause (1), or
arising out of any letter issued to such person, in
relation to his appointment to any civil service of
the Crown in India or his continuance in service
under the Government of the Dominion of India or
a Province thereof;
(b) any dispute in respect of any right, liability or
obligation under article 314 as originally enacted.
(4) The provisions of this article shall have effect
notwithstanding anything in article 314 as originally
enacted or in any other provision of this Constitution.]
313. Until other provision is made in this behalf under
this Constitution, all the laws in force immediately before
the commencement of this Constitution and applicable to
any public service or any post which continues to exist
after the commencement of this Constitution, as an allIndia service or as service or post under the Union or a
State shall continue in force so far as consistent with the
provisions of this Constitution.

Transitional
provisions.

314. [Provision for protection of existing officers of certain
services.] Rep. by the Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment)
Act, 1972, s. 3 (w.e.f. 29-8-1972).
CHAPTER II.— PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONS
315. (1) Subject to the provisions of this article, there
shall be a Public Service Commission for the Union and
a Public Service Commission for each State.

Public Service
Commissions for
the Union and for
the States.

186

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States.—
Arts. 315—316.)
(2) Two or more States may agree that there shall be
one Public Service Commission for that group of States,
and if a resolution to that effect is passed by the House
or, where there are two Houses, by each House of the
Legislature of each of those States, Parliament may by
law provide for the appointment of a Joint State Public
Service Commission (referred to in this Chapter as Joint
Commission) to serve the needs of those States.
(3) Any such law as aforesaid may contain such
incidental and consequential provisions as may be
necessary or desirable for giving effect to the purposes of
the law.
(4) The Public Service Commission for the Union, if
requested so to do by the Governor 1*** of a State, may,
with the approval of the President, agree to serve all or
any of the needs of the State.
(5) References in this Constitution to the Union Public
Service Commission or a State Public Service Commission
shall, unless the context otherwise requires, be construed
as references to the Commission serving the needs of the
Union or, as the case may be, the State as respects the
particular matter in question.
Appointment and
term of office of
members.

316. (1) The Chairman and other members of a Public
Service Commission shall be appointed, in the case of the
Union Commission or a Joint Commission, by the
President, and in the case of a State Commission, by the
Governor 1*** of the State:
Provided that as nearly as may be one-half of the
members of every Public Service Commission shall be
persons who at the dates of their respective appointments
have held office for at least ten years either under the
Government of India or under the Government of a State,
and in computing the said period of ten years any period
before the commencement of this Constitution during
which a person has held office under the Crown in India
or under the Government of an Indian State shall be
included.

1
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

187

(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States.—
Arts. 316—317.)
1
[(1A) If the office of the Chairman of the Commission
becomes vacant or if any such Chairman is by reason of
absence or for any other reason unable to perform the
duties of his office, those duties shall, until some person
appointed under clause (1) to the vacant office has
entered on the duties thereof or, as the case may be,
until the Chairman has resumed his duties, be performed
by such one of the other members of the Commission as
the President, in the case of the Union Commission or a
Joint Commission, and the Governor of the State in the
case of a State Commission, may appoint for the
purpose.

(2) A member of a Public Service Commission shall
hold office for a term of six years from the date on which
he enters upon his office or until he attains, in the case
of the Union Commission, the age of sixty-five years,
and in the case of a State Commission or a Joint
Commission, the age of 2[sixty-two years], whichever is
earlier:
Provided that—
(a) a member of a Public Service Commission may,
by writing under his hand addressed, in the case
of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission, to
the President, and in the case of a State Commission,
to the Governor 3*** of the State, resign his office;
(b) a member of a Public Service Commission may
be removed from his office in the manner provided
in clause (1) or clause (3) of article 317.
(3) A person who holds office as a member of a
Public Service Commission shall, on the expiration of his
term of office, be ineligible for re-appointment to that
office.
317. (1) Subject to the provisions of clause (3), the
Chairman or any other member of a Public Service
Commission shall only be removed from his office by

1

Removal and
suspension of a
member of a Public
Service Commission.

Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 11.
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-first Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 2, for “sixty years”.
3
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2

188

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States.—
Art. 317.)
order of the President on the ground of misbehaviour
after the Supreme Court, on reference being made to it by
the President, has, on inquiry held in accordance with
the procedure prescribed in that behalf under article 145,
reported that the Chairman or such other member, as the
case may be, ought on any such ground to be removed.
(2) The President, in the case of the Union Commission
or a Joint Commission, and the Governor 1*** in the case
of a State Commission, may suspend from office the
Chairman or any other member of the Commission in
respect of whom a reference has been made to the Supreme
Court under clause (1) until the President has passed
orders on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court on
such reference.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), the
President may by order remove from office the Chairman
or any other member of a Public Service Commission if
the Chairman or such other member, as the case may
be,—
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) engages during his term of office in any paid
employment outside the duties of his office; or
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to
continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or
body.
(4) If the Chairman or any other member of a Public
Service Commission is or becomes in any way concerned
or interested in any contract or agreement made by or on
behalf of the Government of India or the Government of
a State or participates in any way in the profit thereof or
in any benefit or emolument arising therefrom otherwise
than as a member and in common with the other
members of an incorporated company, he shall, for the
purposes of clause (1), be deemed to be guilty of
misbehaviour.

1
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

189

((Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States.—
Arts. 318—319.)
318. In the case of the Union Commission or a Joint
Commission, the President and, in the case of a State
Commission, the Governor 1*** of the State may by
regulations—
(a) determine the number of members of the
Commission and their conditions of service; and

Power to make
regulations as to
conditions of
service of members
and staff of the
Commission.

(b) make provision with respect to the number of
members of the staff of the Commission and their
conditions of service:
Provided that the conditions of service of a member
of a Public Service Commission shall not be varied to his
disadvantage after his appointment.
319. On ceasing to hold office—
(a) the Chairman of the Union Public Service
Commission shall be ineligible for further
employment either under the Government of India
or under the Government of a State;

Prohibition as to
the holding of
offices by members
of Commission on
ceasing to be such
members.

(b) the Chairman of a State Public Service
Commission shall be eligible for appointment as the
Chairman or any other member of the Union Public
Service Commission or as the Chairman of any other
State Public Service Commission, but not for any
other employment either under the Government of
India or under the Government of a State;
(c) a member other than the Chairman of the
Union Public Service Commission shall be eligible
for appointment as the Chairman of the Union Public
Service Commission, or as the Chairman of a State
Public Service Commission, but not for any other
employment either under the Government of India
or under the Government of a State;
(d) a member other than the Chairman of a State
Public Service Commission shall be eligible for
appointment as the Chairman or any other member
1
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.

190

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States.—
Arts. 319—320.)
of the Union Public Service Commission or as the
Chairman of that or any other State Public Service
Commission, but not for any other employment either
under the Government of India or under the
Government of a State.
Functions of
Public Service
Commissions.

320. (1) It shall be the duty of the Union and the State
Public Service Commissions to conduct examinations for
appointments to the services of the Union and the services
of the State respectively.
(2) It shall also be the duty of the Union Public Service
Commission, if requested by any two or more States so to
do, to assist those States in framing and operating schemes
of joint recruitment for any services for which candidates
possessing special qualifications are required.
(3) The Union Public Service Commission or the State
Public Service Commission, as the case may be, shall be
consulted—
(a) on all matters relating to methods of
recruitment to civil services and for civil posts;
(b) on the principles to be followed in making
appointments to civil services and posts and in
making promotions and transfers from one service
to another and on the suitability of candidates for
such appointments, promotions or transfers;
(c) on all disciplinary matters affecting a person
serving under the Government of India or the
Government of a State in a civil capacity, including
memorials or petitions relating to such matters;
(d) on any claim by or in respect of a person who
is serving or has served under the Government of
India or the Government of a State or under the
Crown in India or under the Government of an Indian
State, in a civil capacity, that any costs incurred by
him in defending legal proceedings instituted against
him in respect of acts done or purporting to be done
in the execution of his duty should be paid out of the

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

191

(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States.—
Art. 320.)
Consolidated Fund of India, or, as the case may be,
out of the Consolidated Fund of the State;
(e) on any claim for the award of a pension in
respect of injuries sustained by a person while
serving under the Government of India or the
Government of a State or under the Crown in India
or under the Government of an Indian State, in a
civil capacity, and any question as to the amount of
any such award,
and it shall be the duty of a Public Service Commission
to advise on any matter so referred to them and on any
other matter which the President, or, as the case may be,
the Governor 1*** of the State, may refer to them:
Provided that the President as respects the all-India
services and also as respects other services and posts in
connection with the affairs of the Union, and the
Governor 2***, as respects other services and posts in
connection with the affairs of a State, may make
regulations specifying the matters in which either
generally, or in any particular class of case or in any
particular circumstances, it shall not be necessary for a
Public Service Commission to be consulted.
(4) Nothing in clause (3) shall require a Public Service
Commission to be consulted as respects the manner in
which any provision referred to in clause (4) of article 16
may be made or as respects the manner in which effect
may be given to the provisions of article 335.
(5) All regulations made under the proviso to
clause (3) by the President or the Governor 1*** of a State
shall be laid for not less than fourteen days before each
House of Parliament or the House or each House of the
Legislature of the State, as the case may be, as soon as
possible after they are made, and shall be subject to such
modifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment,
as both Houses of Parliament or the House or both Houses

1
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2
The words “or Rajpramukh, as the case may be” omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.

192

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States.—
Arts. 320—323.)
of the Legislature of the State may make during the
session in which they are so laid.
Power to extend
functions of
Public Service
Commissions.

321. An Act made by Parliament or, as the case may
be, the Legislature of a State may provide for the exercise
of additional functions by the Union Public Service
Commission or the State Public Service Commission as
respects the services of the Union or the State and also as
respects the services of any local authority or other body
corporate constituted by law or of any public institution.

Expenses of
Public Service
Commissions.

322. The expenses of the Union or a State Public
Service Commission, including any salaries, allowances
and pensions payable to or in respect of the members or
staff of the Commission, shall be charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India or, as the case may be, the
Consolidated Fund of the State.

Reports of Public
Service
Commissions.

323. (1) It shall be the duty of the Union Commission
to present annually to the President a report as to the
work done by the Commission and on receipt of such
report the President shall cause a copy thereof together
with a memorandum explaining, as respects the cases, if
any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted,
the reasons for such non-acceptance to be laid before
each House of Parliament.
(2) It shall be the duty of a State Commission to
present annually to the Governor 1*** of the State a report
as to the work done by the Commission, and it shall be
the duty of a Joint Commission to present annually to the
Governor 1*** of each of the States the needs of which are
served by the Joint Commission a report as to the work
done by the Commission in relation to that State, and in
either case the Governor 2***, shall, on receipt of such
report, cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum
explaining, as respects the cases, if any, where the advice
of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for
such non-acceptance to be laid before the Legislature of
the State.

1
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2
The words “or Rajpramukh, as the case may be” omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.

1

[PART XIVA

TRIBUNALS
323A. (1) Parliament may, by law, provide for the
adjudication or trial by administrative tribunals of
disputes and complaints with respect to recruitment and
conditions of service of persons appointed to public
services and posts in connection with the affairs of the
Union or of any State or of any local or other authority
within the territory of India or under the control of the
Government of India or of any corporation owned or
controlled by the Government.

Administrative
tribunals.

(2) A law made under clause (1) may—
(a) provide for the establishment of an
administrative tribunal for the Union and a separate
administrative tribunal for each State or for two or
more States;
(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the
power to punish for contempt) and authority which
may be exercised by each of the said tribunals;
(c) provide for the procedure (including provisions
as to limitation and rules of evidence) to be followed
by the said tribunals;
(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except
the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article
136, with respect to the disputes or complaints
referred to in clause (1);
(e) provide for the transfer to each such
administrative tribunal of any cases pending before
any court or other authority immediately before the
establishment of such tribunal as would have been
within the jurisdiction of such tribunal if the causes
of action on which such suits or proceedings are
based had arisen after such establishment;
(f) repeal or amend any order made by the
President under clause (3) of article 371D;
1

Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 46 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

193

194

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIVA.—Tribunals.—Arts. 323A—323B.)
(g) contain such supplemental, incidental and
consequential provisions (including provisions as to
fees) as Parliament may deem necessary for the
effective functioning of, and for the speedy disposal
of cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of,
such tribunals.
(3) The provisions of this article shall have effect
notwithstanding anything in any other provision of this
Constitution or in any other law for the time being in
force.
Tribunals for
other matters.

323B. (1) The appropriate Legislature may, by law,
provide for the adjudication or trial by tribunals of any
disputes, complaints, or offences with respect to all or
any of the matters specified in clause (2) with respect to
which such Legislature has power to make laws.
(2) The matters referred to in clause (1) are the
following, namely:—
(a) levy, assessment, collection and enforcement
of any tax;
(b) foreign exchange, import and export across
customs frontiers;
(c) industrial and labour disputes;
(d) land reforms by way of acquisition by the State
of any estate as defined in article 31A or of any rights
therein or the extinguishment or modification of any
such rights or by way of ceiling on agricultural land
or in any other way;
(e) ceiling on urban property;
(f) elections to either House of Parliament or the
House or either House of the Legislature of a State,
but excluding the matters referred to in article 329
and article 329A;
(g) production, procurement, supply and
distribution of food-stuffs (including edible oilseeds
and oils) and such other goods as the President may,
by public notification, declare to be essential goods

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

195

(Part XIVA.—Tribunals.—Art. 323B.)
for the purpose of this article and control of prices of
such goods;
1
[(h) rent, its regulation and control and tenancy issues
including the right, title and interest of landlords and
tenants;]
2

[(i)] offences against laws with respect to any of the
matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to 3[(h)] and fees in
respect of any of those matters;
2
[(j)] any matter incidental to any of the matters
specified in sub-clauses (a) to 4[(i)].

(3) A law made under clause (1) may—
(a) provide for the establishment of a hierarchy of
tribunals;
(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the
power to punish for contempt) and authority which
may be exercised by each of the said tribunals;
(c) provide for the procedure (including provisions
as to limitation and rules of evidence) to be followed
by the said tribunals;
(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under article 136,
with respect to all or any of the matters falling within
the jurisdiction of the said tribunals;
(e) provide for the transfer to each such tribunal of
any cases pending before any court or any other
authority immediately before the establishment of
such tribunal as would have been within the
jurisdiction of such tribunal if the causes of action on
which such suits or proceedings are based had arisen
after such establishment;
1

Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amendment) Act, 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).
Sub-clauses (h) and (i) re-lettered as sub-clauses (i) and (j) by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f.
15-5-1994).
3
Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “(g)” (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).
4
Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “(h)” (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).
2

196

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIVA.—Tribunals.—Art. 323B.)
(f) contain such supplemental, incidental and
consequential provisions (including provisions as to
fees) as the appropriate Legislature may deem
necessary for the effective functioning of, and for the
speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of
the orders of, such tribunals.
(4) The provisions of this article shall have effect
notwithstanding anything in any other provision of this
Constitution or in any other law for the time being in
force.
Explanation.—In this article, “appropriate
Legislature”, in relation to any matter, means Parliament
or, as the case may be, a State Legislature competent to
make laws with respect to such matter in accordance
with the provisions of Part XI.]

PART XV
ELECTIONS
324. (1) The superintendence, direction and control
of the preparation of the electoral rolls for, and the
conduct of, all elections to Parliament and to the
Legislature of every State and of elections to the offices
of President and Vice-President held under this
Constitution 1*** shall be vested in a Commission
(referred to in this Constitution as the Election
Commission).

Superintendence,
direction and
control of elections
to be vested in an
Election
Commission.

(2) The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief
Election Commissioner and such number of other
Election Commissioners, if any, as the President may
from time to time fix and the appointment of the Chief
Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners
shall, subject to the provisions of any law made in that
behalf by Parliament, be made by the President.
(3) When any other Election Commissioner is so
appointed the Chief Election Commissioner shall act as
the Chairman of the Election Commission.
(4) Before each general election to the House of the
People and to the Legislative Assembly of each State,
and before the first general election and thereafter before
each biennial election to the Legislative Council of each
State having such Council, the President may also appoint
after consultation with the Election Commission such
Regional Commissioners as he may consider necessary
to assist the Election Commission in the performance
of the functions conferred on the Commission by
clause (1).
(5) Subject to the provisions of any law made by
Parliament, the conditions of service and tenure of
office of the Election Commissioners and the Regional
Commissioners shall be such as the President may by
rule determine:
1
The words “including the appointment of election tribunals for the decision of doubts
and disputes arising out of or in connection with elections to Parliament and to the Legislatures
of States” omitted by the Constitution (Nineteenth Amendment) Act, 1966, s. 2.

197

198

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XV.—Elections.—Arts. 324—326.)
Provided that the Chief Election Commissioner shall
not be removed from his office except in like manner and
on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court and
the conditions of service of the Chief Election
Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage
after his appointment:
Provided further that any other Election Commissioner
or a Regional Commissioner shall not be removed from
office except on the recommendation of the Chief Election
Commissioner.
(6) The President, or the Governor 1*** of a State,
shall, when so requested by the Election Commission,
make available to the Election Commission or to a Regional
Commissioner such staff as may be necessary for the
discharge of the functions conferred on the Election
Commission by clause (1).
No person to be
ineligible for
inclusion in, or to
claim to be
included in a
special, electoral
roll on grounds of
religion, race,
caste or sex.

325. There shall be one general electoral roll for every
territorial constituency for election to either House of
Parliament or to the House or either House of the
Legislature of a State and no person shall be ineligible
for inclusion in any such roll or claim to be included
in any special electoral roll for any such constituency
on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex or any of
them.

Elections to the
House of the
People and to the
Legislative
Assemblies of
States to be on
the basis of adult
suffrage.

326. The elections to the House of the People and to
the Legislative Assembly of every State shall be on the
basis of adult suffrage; that is to say, every person who
is a citizen of India and who is not less than 2[eighteen
years] of age on such date as may be fixed in that behalf
by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature
and is not otherwise disqualified under this Constitution
or any law made by the appropriate Legislature on the
ground of non-residence, unsoundness of mind, crime or
corrupt or illegal practice, shall be entitled to be registered
as a voter at any such election.

1
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-first Amendment) Act, 1988, s. 2, for “twenty-one
years”.

199

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XV.—Elections.—Arts. 327—329A.)
327. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution,
Parliament may from time to time by law make provision
with respect to all matters relating to, or in connection
with, elections to either House of Parliament or to the
House or either House of the Legislature of a State
including the preparation of electoral rolls, the
delimitation of constituencies and all other matters
necessary for securing the due constitution of such House
or Houses.

Power of
Parliament to make
provision with
respect to elections
to Legislatures.

328. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and
in so far as provision in that behalf is not made by
Parliament, the Legislature of a State may from time to
time by law make provision with respect to all matters
relating to, or in connection with, the elections to the
House or either House of the Legislature of the State
including the preparation of electoral rolls and all other
matters necessary for securing the due constitution of
such House or Houses.

Power of
Legislature of a
State to make
provision with
respect to elections
to such Legislature.

329. 1[Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution
***—]

Bar to interference
by courts in
electoral matters.

2

(a) the validity of any law relating to the
delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats
to such constituencies, made or purporting to be
made under article 327 or article 328, shall not be
called in question in any court;
(b) no election to either House of Parliament or to
the House or either House of the Legislature of a
State shall be called in question except by an election
petition presented to such authority and in such
manner as may be provided for by or under any law
made by the appropriate Legislature.
3

329A. [Special provision as to elections to Parliament in
the case of Prime Minister and Speaker.] Rep. by the
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 36 (w.e.f.
20-6-1979).
1

Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 3, for certain words.

2

The words, figures and letters “but subject to the provisions of article 329A” omitted
by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 35 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3

Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 4.

PART XVI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING
TO CERTAIN CLASSES
Reservation of seats
for Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled Tribes in
the House of the
People.

330. (1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the
People for —
(a) the Scheduled Castes;
1

[(b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled
Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam; and]
(c) the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous
districts of Assam.
(2) The number of seats reserved in any State 2[or
Union territory] for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes under clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be,
the same proportion to the total number of seats allotted
to that State 2[or Union territory] in the House of the
People as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the
State 2[or Union territory] or of the Scheduled Tribes in
the State 2[or Union territory] or part of the State 2[or
Union territory, as the case may be, in respect of which
seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the
State 2[or Union territory].
3
[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(2), the number of seats reserved in the House of the
People for the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous
districts of Assam shall bear to the total number of seats
allotted to that State a proportion not less than the
population of the Scheduled Tribes in the said autonomous
districts bears to the total population of the State.]
4

[Explanation—In this article and in article 332, the
expression “population” means the population as
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-first Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2, for sub-clause (b)
(w.e.f. 16-6-1986).
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
3
Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-first Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 3.
4
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 47 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

200

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

201

(Part XVI.—Special Provisions relating to certain
Classes.—Arts. 330—332.)
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the
last preceding census of which the relevant figures have
been published shall, until the relevant figures for the
first census taken after the year 1[2026] have been
published, be construed as a reference to the 2[2001]
census.]
331. Notwithstanding anything in article 81, the
President may, if he is of opinion that the Anglo-Indian
community is not adequately represented in the House of
the People, nominate not more than two members of that
community to the House of the People.

Representation of
the Anglo-Indian
Community in the
House of the
People.

332. (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, 3[except the Scheduled
Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam], in the
Legislative Assembly of every State 4***.

Reservation of seats
for Scheduled
Castes and
Scheduled Tribes in
the Legislative
Assemblies of the
States.

(2) Seats shall be reserved also for the autonomous
districts in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam.
(3) The number of seats reserved for the Scheduled
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative
Assembly of any State under clause (1) shall bear, as
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number
of seats in the Assembly as the population of the
Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes
in the State or part of the State, as the case may be, in
respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total
population of the State.
5
[(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(3), until the taking effect, under article 170, of the readjustment, on the basis of the first census after the year
6
[2026], of the number of seats in the Legislative

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 6, for “2000” and
“1971” respectively.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 5, for “1991”.
3
Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-first Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 3, for certain words
(w.e.f. 16-6-1986).
4
The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
5
Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f.
21-9-1987).
6
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 7, for “2000”.

202

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVI.—Special Provisions relating to certain
Classes.—Art. 332.)
Assemblies of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya,
Mizoram and Nagaland, the seats which shall be reserved
for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of
any such State shall be,—
(a) if all the seats in the Legislative Assembly of
such State in existence on the date of coming into
force of the Constitution (Fifty-seventh Amendment)
Act, 1987 (hereafter in this clause referred to as the
existing Assembly) are held by members of the
Scheduled Tribes, all the seats except one;
(b) in any other case, such number of seats as
bears to the total number of seats, a proportion not
less than the number (as on the said date) of members
belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in the existing
Assembly bears to the total number of seats in the
existing Assembly.]
1
[(3B) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(3), until the re-adjustment, under article 170, takes effect
on the basis of the first census after the year 2[2026], of
the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Tripura, the seats which shall be reserved for the
Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly shall be,
such number of seats as bears to the total number of
seats, a proportion not less than the number, as on the
date of coming into force of the Constitution (Seventysecond Amendment) Act, 1992, of members belonging to
the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly in
existence on the said date bears to the total number of
seats in that Assembly.]

(4) The number of seats reserved for an autonomous
district in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam
shall bear to the total number of seats in that Assembly
a proportion not less than the population of the district
bears to the total population of the State.
(5) The constituencies for the seats reserved for any
autonomous district of Assam shall not comprise any
area outside that district 3***.
1
Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-second Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f.
5-12-1992).
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 7, for “2000”.
3
Certain words omitted by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of
1971), s. 71 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

203

(Part XVI.—Special Provisions relating to certain
Classes.—Arts. 332—334.)
(6) No person who is not a member of a Scheduled
Tribe of any autonomous district of the State of Assam
shall be eligible for election to the Legislative Assembly
of the State from any constituency of that district 1***:
2

[Provided that for elections to the Legislative
Assembly of the State of Assam, the representation of the
Scheduled Tribes and non-Scheduled Tribes in the
constituencies included in the Bodoland Territorial Areas
District, so notified, and existing prior to the constitution
of Bodoland Territorial Areas District, shall be
maintained.]
333. Notwithstanding anything in article 170, the
Governor 3*** of a State may, if he is of opinion that the
Anglo-Indian community needs representation in the
Legislative Assembly of the State and is not adequately
represented therein, 4[nominate one member of that
community to the Assembly].
334. Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing
provisions of this Part, the provisions of this Constitution
relating to—
(a) the reservation of seats for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the House of the
People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States;
and
(b) the representation of the Anglo-Indian
community in the House of the People and in the
Legislative Assemblies of the States by nomination,

Representation of
the Anglo-Indian
community in the
Legislative
Assemblies of the
States.
Reservation of
seats and special
representation to
cease after 5[sixty
years].

shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of
[sixty years] from the commencement of this
Constitution:
Provided that nothing in this article shall affect any
representation in the House of the People or in the
Legislative Assembly of a State until the dissolution of
the then existing House or Assembly, as the case may be.
5

1
Certain words omitted by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of
1971), s. 71 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Ninetieth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2.
3
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.
4
Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-third Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 4, for “nominate
such number of members of the community to the Assembly as he considers appropriate”.
5
Subs. by the Constitution (Seventy-ninth Amendment) Act, 1999, s. 2, for “fifty years”
(w.e.f. 25-1-2000).

204

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVI.—Special Provisions relating to certain
Classes.—Arts. 335—337.)
Claims of
Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled
Tribes to services
and posts.

335. The claims of the members of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into
consideration, consistently with the maintenance of
efficiency of administration, in the making of
appointments to services and posts in connection with
the affairs of the Union or of a State:
1

[Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent in
making of any provision in favour of the members of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for relaxation in
qualifying marks in any examination or lowering the
standards of evaluation, for reservation in matters of
promotion to any class or classes of services or posts in
connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State.]
Special provision
for Anglo-Indian
community in
certain services.

336. (1) During the first two years after the
commencement of this Constitution, appointments of
members of the Anglo-Indian community to posts in the
railway, customs, postal and telegraph services of the
Union shall be made on the same basis as immediately
before the fifteenth day of August, 1947.
During every succeeding period of two years, the
number of posts reserved for the members of the said
community in the said services shall, as nearly as possible,
be less by ten per cent. than the numbers so reserved
during the immediately preceding period of two years:
Provided that at the end of ten years from the
commencement of this Constitution all such reservations
shall cease.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall bar the appointment of
members of the Anglo-Indian community to posts other
than, or in addition to, those reserved for the community
under that clause if such members are found qualified
for appointment on merit as compared with the members
of other communities.

Special provision
with respect to
educational grants
for the benefit of
Anglo-Indian
community.

1

337. During the first three financial years after the
commencement of this Constitution, the same grants, if
any, shall be made by the Union and by each State 2***
for the benefit of the Anglo-Indian community in respect
of education as were made in the financial year ending
on the thirty-first day of March, 1948.

Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-second Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2.
The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2

205

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVI.—Special Provisions relating to certain
Classes.—Arts. 337-338.)
During every succeeding period of three years the
grants may be less by ten per cent. than those for the
immediately preceding period of three years :
Provided that at the end of ten years from the
commencement of this Constitution such grants, to the
extent to which they are a special concession to the AngloIndian community, shall cease:
Provided further that no educational institution shall
be entitled to receive any grant under this article unless
at least forty per cent. of the annual admissions therein
are made available to members of communities other
than the Anglo-Indian community.
338. 2[(1) There shall be a Commission for the
Scheduled Castes to be known as the National
Commission for the Scheduled Castes.

1

[National
Commission for
Scheduled Castes.]

(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this
behalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members
and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so
appointed shall be such as the President may by rule
determine.]
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other
Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the
President by warrant under his hand and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate
its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating
to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Castes
3
*** under this Constitution or under any other law
for the time being in force or under any order of the
Government and to evaluate the working of such
safeguards;

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2, for the marginal
heading (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
2
Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for cls. (1) and (2) (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
3
The words “and Scheduled Tribes” omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).

206

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVI.—Special Provisions relating to certain
Classes.—Art. 338.)
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect
to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the
Scheduled Castes 1***;
(c) to participate and advise on the planning
process of socio-economic development of the
Scheduled Castes 1*** and to evaluate the progress of
their development under the Union and any State;
(d) to present to the President, annually and at
such other times as the Commission may deem fit,
reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(e) to make in such reports recommendations as to
the measures that should be taken by the Union
or any State for the effective implementation of those
safeguards and other measures for the protection,
welfare and socio-economic development of the
Scheduled Castes 1***; and
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to
the protection, welfare and development and
advancement of the Scheduled Castes 1*** as the
President may, subject to the provisions of any law
made by Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be
laid before each House of Parliament along with a
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to
be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union
and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of
such recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates
to any matter with which any State Government is
concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to
the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid
before the Legislature of the State along with a
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to
be taken on the recommendations relating to the State
and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of
such recommendations.
1
The words “and Scheduled Tribes” omitted by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth
Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

207

(Part XVI.—Special Provisions relating to certain
Classes.—Arts. 338-338A.)
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any
matter referred to in sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any
complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (5), have
all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in
particular in respect of the following matters, namely :—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of
any person from any part of India and examining
him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof
from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of
witnesses and documents;
(f) any other matter which the President may, by
rule, determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government shall
consult the Commission on all major policy matters
affecting Scheduled Castes 1***.]
2

[(10)] In this article, references to the Scheduled
Castes 1*** shall be construed as including references to
such other backward classes as the President may, on
receipt of the report of a Commission appointed under
clause (1) of article 340, by order specify and also to the
Anglo-Indian community.
3

[338A. (1) There shall be a Commission for the
Scheduled Tribes to be known as the National
Commission for the Scheduled Tribes.

National
Commission for
Scheduled Tribes.

(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this
behalf by Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and three other Members
and the conditions of service and tenure of office of the
1
The words “and Scheduled Tribes” omitted by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth
Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
2
Cl. (3) renumbered as cl. (10) by the Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1990,
s. 2 (w.e.f. 12-3-1992).
3
Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).

208

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVI.—Special Provisions relating to certain
Classes.—Art. 338A.)
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so
appointed shall be such as the President by rule
determine.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other
Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the
President by warrant under his hand and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate
its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating
to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled Tribes
under this Constitution or under any other law for
the time being in force or under any order of the
Government and to evaluate the working of such
safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect
to the deprivation of rights and safeguards of the
Scheduled Tribes;
(c) to participate and advise on the planning
process of socio-economic development of the
Scheduled Tribes and to evaluate the progress of their
development under the Union and any State;
(d) to present to the President, annually and at
such other times as the Commission may deem fit,
reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(e) to make in such reports recommendations as
to the measures that should be taken by the Union
or any State for the effective implementation of those
safeguards and other measures for the protection,
welfare and socio-economic development of the
Scheduled Tribes; and
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to
the protection, welfare and development and
advancement of the Scheduled Tribes as the President
may, subject to the provisions of any law made by
Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be
laid before each House of Parliament along with a
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

209

(Part XVI.—Special Provisions relating to certain
Classes.—Arts. 338A-339.)
to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union
and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of
such recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates
to any matter with which any State Government is
concerned, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to
the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid
before the Legislature of the State along with a
memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to
be taken on the recommendations relating to the State
and the reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of
such recommendations.
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any
matter referred to in sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any
complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of clause (5), have
all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in
particular in respect of the following matters, namely: —
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of
any person from any part of India and examining
him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof
from any court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of
witnesses and documents;
(f) any other matter which the President may, by
rule, determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government shall
consult the Commission on all major policy matters
affecting Scheduled Tribes.]
339. (1) The President may at any time and shall, at
the expiration of ten years from the commencement of
this Constitution by order appoint a Commission to
report on the administration of the Scheduled Areas and
the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the States 1***.

Control of the
Union over the
administration of
Scheduled Areas
and the welfare of
Scheduled Tribes.

1
The words and letters “specified in Part A and Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.

210

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVI.—Special Provisions relating to certain
Classes.—Arts. 339—341.)
The order may define the composition, powers and
procedure of the Commission and may contain such
incidental or ancillary provisions as the President may
consider necessary or desirable.
(2) The executive power of the Union shall extend to
the giving of directions to 1[a State] as to the drawing up
and execution of schemes specified in the direction to be
essential for the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the
State.
Appointment of a
Commission to
investigate the
conditions of
backward classes.

340. (1) The President may by order appoint a
Commission consisting of such persons as he thinks fit
to investigate the conditions of socially and educationally
backward classes within the territory of India and the
difficulties under which they labour and to make
recommendations as to the steps that should be taken by
the Union or any State to remove such difficulties and to
improve their condition and as to the grants that should
be made for the purpose by the Union or any State and
the conditions subject to which such grants should be
made, and the order appointing such Commission shall
define the procedure to be followed by the Commission.
(2) A Commission so appointed shall investigate the
matters referred to them and present to the President a
report setting out the facts as found by them and making
such recommendations as they think proper.
(3) The President shall cause a copy of the report so
presented together with a memorandum explaining the
action taken thereon to be laid before each House of
Parliament.

Scheduled Castes.

341. (1) The President 2[may with respect to any State
[or Union territory], and where it is a State 4***,
after consultation with the Governor 5*** thereof,] by

3

1
Subs by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for “any such
State”.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 10, for “may, after consultation
with the Governor or Rajpramukh of a State”.
3
Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
4
The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by
s. 29 and Sch., ibid.
5
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

211

(Part XVI.—Special Provisions relating to certain
Classes.—Arts. 341-342.)
public notification1, specify the castes, races or tribes or
parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which
shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to
be Scheduled Castes in relation to that State 2[or Union
territory, as the case may be].
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from
the list of Scheduled Castes specified in a notification
issued under clause (1) any caste, race or tribe or part of
or group within any caste, race or tribe, but save as
aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall
not be varied by any subsequent notification.
342. (1) The President 3[may with respect to any State
[or Union territory], and where it is a State 4***, after
consultation with the Governor 5*** thereof,] by public
notification6, specify the tribes or tribal communities or
parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities
which shall for the purposes of this Constitution be
deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State
2
[or Union territory, as the case may be].

Scheduled Tribes.

2

(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from
the list of Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification
issued under clause (1) any tribe or tribal community or
part of or group within any tribe or tribal community, but
save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said
clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification.
1
See the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 (C.O. 19), the Constitution
(Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951 (C.O. 32), the Constitution (Jammu and
Kashmir) Scheduled Castes Order, 1956 (C.O. 52), the Constitution (Dadra and Nagar
Haveli) Scheduled Castes Order, 1962 (C.O. 64), the Constitution (Pondicherry) Scheduled
Castes Order, 1964 (C.O. 68), the Constitution (Goa, Daman and Diu) Scheduled Castes
Order, 1968 (C.O. 81) and the Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Castes Order, 1978 (C.O.
110).
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
3
Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 11, for “may, after consultation
with the Governor or Rajpramukh of a State,”.
4
The words and letters “Specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
5
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.
6
See the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 (C.O. 22), the Constitution
(Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951 (C.O. 33), the Constitution (Andaman
and Nicobar Islands) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1959 (C.O. 58), the Constitution (Dadra and
Nagar Haveli) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1962 (C.O. 65), the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes)
(Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1967 (C.O. 78), the Constitution (Goa, Daman and Diu) Scheduled
Tribes Order, 1968 (C.O. 82), the Constitution (Nagaland) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1970
(C.O. 88) and the Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1978 (C.O. 111).

PART XVII
OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
CHAPTER I.—LANGUAGE OF THE UNION
Official language
of the Union.

343. (1) The official language of the Union shall be
Hindi in Devanagari script.
The form of numerals to be used for the official
purposes of the Union shall be the international form of
Indian numerals.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), for a
period of fifteen years from the commencement of this
Constitution, the English language shall continue to be
used for all the official purposes of the Union for which
it was being used immediately before such
commencement:
Provided that the President may, during the said
period, by order1 authorise the use of the Hindi language
in addition to the English language and of the Devanagari
form of numerals in addition to the international form of
Indian numerals for any of the official purposes of the
Union.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article,
Parliament may by law provide for the use, after the said
period of fifteen years, of—
(a) the English language, or
(b) the Devanagari form of numerals,
for such purposes as may be specified in the law.

Commission and
Committee of
Parliament on
official language.

1

344. (1) The President shall, at the expiration of five
years from the commencement of this Constitution and
thereafter at the expiration of ten years from such
commencement, by order constitute a Commission which
shall consist of a Chairman and such other members
representing the different languages specified in the Eighth
Schedule as the President may appoint, and the order

See C.O. 41.

212

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVII.—Official Language.—Art. 344.)
shall define the procedure to be followed by the
Commission.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make
recommendations to the President as to—
(a) the progressive use of the Hindi language for
the official purposes of the Union;
(b) restrictions on the use of the English language
for all or any of the official purposes of the Union;
(c) the language to be used for all or any of the
purposes mentioned in article 348;
(d) the form of numerals to be used for any one or
more specified purposes of the Union;
(e) any other matter referred to the Commission by
the President as regards the official language of the
Union and the language for communication between
the Union and a State or between one State and
another and their use.
(3) In making their recommendations under
clause (2), the Commission shall have due regard to the
industrial, cultural and scientific advancement of India,
and the just claims and the interests of persons belonging
to the non-Hindi speaking areas in regard to the public
services.
(4) There shall be constituted a Committee consisting
of thirty members, of whom twenty shall be members of
the House of the People and ten shall be members of the
Council of States to be elected respectively by the
members of the House of the People and the members
of the Council of States in accordance with the system of
proportional representation by means of the single
transferable vote.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Committee to examine
the recommendations of the Commission constituted
under clause (1) and to report to the President their
opinion thereon.

213

214

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVII.—Official Language.—Arts. 344—348.)
(6) Notwithstanding anything in article 343, the
President may, after consideration of the report referred
to in clause (5), issue directions in accordance with the
whole or any part of that report.
CHAPTER II.—REGIONAL LANGUAGES
Official language
or languages of a
State.

345. Subject to the provisions of articles 346 and 347,
the Legislature of a State may by law adopt any one or
more of the languages in use in the State or Hindi as the
language or languages to be used for all or any of the
official purposes of that State:
Provided that, until the Legislature of the State
otherwise provides by law, the English language shall
continue to be used for those official purposes within the
State for which it was being used immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution.

Official language
for communication
between one State
and another or
between a State
and the Union.

346. The language for the time being authorised for
use in the Union for official purposes shall be the official
language for communication between one State and
another State and between a State and the Union:

Special provision
relating to language
spoken by a section
of the population
of a State.

347. On a demand being made in that behalf the
President may, if he is satisfied that a substantial
proportion of the population of a State desire the use of
any language spoken by them to be recognised by that
State, direct that such language shall also be officially
recognised throughout that State or any part thereof for
such purpose as he may specify.

Provided that if two or more States agree that the
Hindi language should be the official language for
communication between such States, that language may
be used for such communication.

CHAPTER III.—LANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME COURT,
HIGH COURTS, ETC.
Language to be
used in the
Supreme Court and
in the High Courts
and for Acts, Bills,
etc.

348. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing
provisions of this Part, until Parliament by law otherwise
provides—
(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in
every High Court,

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

215

(Part XVII.—Official Language.—Art. 348.)
(b) the authoritative texts—
(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments
thereto to be moved in either House of Parliament
or in the House or either House of the Legislature
of a State,
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the
Legislature of a State and of all Ordinances
promulgated by the President or the Governor 1***
of a State, and
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws
issued under this Constitution or under any law
made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State,
shall be in the English language.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (a) of
clause (1), the Governor 1*** of a State may, with the
previous consent of the President, authorise the use of the
Hindi language, or any other language used for any official
purposes of the State, in proceedings in the High Court
having its principal seat in that State:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to
any judgment, decree or order passed or made by such
High Court.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (b) of
clause (1), where the Legislature of a State has prescribed
any language other than the English language for use in
Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by, the Legislature of
the State or in Ordinances promulgated by the Governor
1
*** of the State or in any order, rule, regulation or
bye-law referred to in paragraph (iii) of that sub-clause,
a translation of the same in the English language
published under the authority of the Governor 1*** of the
State in the Official Gazette of that State shall be deemed
to be the authoritative text thereof in the English language
under this article.

1
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.

216

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVII.—Official Language.—Arts. 349—351.)
Special procedure
for enactment of
certain laws
relating to
language.

349. During the period of fifteen years from the
commencement of this Constitution, no Bill or amendment
making provision for the language to be used for any of
the purposes mentioned in clause (1) of article 348 shall
be introduced or moved in either House of Parliament
without the previous sanction of the President, and the
President shall not give his sanction to the introduction
of any such Bill or the moving of any such amendment
except after he has taken into consideration the
recommendations of the Commission constituted under
clause (1) of article 344 and the report of the Committee
constituted under clause (4) of that article.
CHAPTER IV.—SPECIAL DIRECTIVES

Language to be
used in
representations for
redress of
grievances.

350. Every person shall be entitled to submit a
representation for the redress of any grievance to any
officer or authority of the Union or a State in any of the
languages used in the Union or in the State, as the case
may be.
1

Facilities for
instruction in
mother-tongue at
primary stage.

[350A. It shall be the endeavour of every State and
of every local authority within the State to provide
adequate facilities for instruction in the mother-tongue at
the primary stage of education to children belonging to
linguistic minority groups; and the President may issue
such directions to any State as he considers necessary or
proper for securing the provision of such facilities.

Special Officer for
linguistic
minorities.

350B. (1) There shall be a Special Officer for linguistic
minorities to be appointed by the President.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Special Officer to
investigate all matters relating to the safeguards provided
for linguistic minorities under this Constitution and
report to the President upon those matters at such
intervals as the President may direct, and the President
shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House
of Parliament, and sent to the Governments of the States
concerned.]

Directive for
development of the
Hindi language.

1

351. It shall be the duty of the Union to promote the
spread of the Hindi language, to develop it so that it may

Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 21.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVII.—Official Language.—Art. 351.)
serve as a medium of expression for all the elements of
the composite culture of India and to secure its
enrichment by assimilating without interfering with its
genius, the forms, style and expressions used in
Hindustani and in the other languages of India specified
in the Eighth Schedule, and by drawing, wherever
necessary or desirable, for its vocabulary, primarily on
Sanskrit and secondarily on other languages.

217

PART XVIII
EMERGENCY PROVISIONS
Proclamation of
Emergency.

352. (1) If the President is satisfied that a grave
emergency exists whereby the security of India or of any
part of the territory thereof is threatened, whether by
war or external aggression or 1[armed rebellion], he may,
by Proclamation, make a declaration to that effect 2[in
respect of the whole of India or of such part of the
territory thereof as may be specified in the Proclamation].
3

[Explanation.—A Proclamation of Emergency
declaring that the security of India or any part of the
territory thereof is threatened by war or by external
aggression or by armed rebellion may be made before
the actual occurrence of war or of any such aggression or
rebellion, if the President is satisfied that there is imminent
danger thereof.]
4

[(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1) may be
varied or revoked by a subsequent Proclamation.
(3) The President shall not issue a Proclamation under
clause (1) or a Proclamation varying such Proclamation
unless the decision of the Union Cabinet (that is to say,
the Council consisting of the Prime Minister and other
Ministers of Cabinet rank appointed under article 75)
that such a Proclamation may be issued has been
communicated to him in writing.
(4) Every Proclamation issued under this article shall
be laid before each House of Parliament and shall, except
where it is a Proclamation revoking a previous
Proclamation, cease to operate at the expiration of one
month unless before the expiration of that period it has
been approved by resolutions of both Houses of
Parliament:
1
Subs by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 37, for “internal
disturbance” (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 48 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 37 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
4
Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for cls. (2), (2A) and (3) (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

218

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVIII.—Emergency Provisions.—Art. 352.)
Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being a
Proclamation revoking a previous Proclamation) is issued
at a time when the House of the People has been dissolved,
or the dissolution of the House of the People takes place
during the period of one month referred to in this clause,
and if a resolution approving the Proclamation has been
passed by the Council of States, but no resolution with
respect to such Proclamation has been passed by the
House of the People before the expiration of that period,
the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration
of thirty days from the date on which the House of the
People first sits after its reconstitution, unless before the
expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution
approving the Proclamation has been also passed by the
House of the People.
(5) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked,
cease to operate on the expiration of a period of six months
from the date of the passing of the second of the
resolutions approving the Proclamation under clause
(4):
Provided that if and so often as a resolution
approving the continuance in force of such a Proclamation
is passed by both Houses of Parliament the Proclamation
shall, unless revoked, continue in force for a further period
of six months from the date on which it would otherwise
have ceased to operate under this clause:
Provided further that if the dissolution of the House
of the People takes place during any such period of six
months and a resolution approving the continuance in
force of such Proclamation has been passed by the
Council of States but no resolution with respect to the
continuance in force of such Proclamation has been
passed by the House of the People during the said period,
the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration
of thirty days from the date on which the House of the
People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the
expiration of the said period of thirty days, a resolution
approving the continuance in force of the Proclamation
has been also passed by the House of the People.

219

220

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVIII.—Emergency Provisions.—Art. 352.)
(6) For the purposes of clauses (4) and (5), a resolution
may be passed by either House of Parliament only by a
majority of the total membership of that House and by a
majority of not less than two-thirds of the Members of
that House present and voting.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
foregoing clauses, the President shall revoke a
Proclamation issued under clause (1) or a Proclamation
varying such Proclamation if the House of the People
passes a resolution disapproving, or, as the case may be,
disapproving the continuance in force of, such
Proclamation.
(8) Where a notice in writing signed by not less than
one-tenth of the total number of members of the House of
the People has been given, of their intention to move a
resolution for disapproving, or, as the case may be, for
disapproving the continuance in force of, a Proclamation
issued under clause (1) or a Proclamation varying such
Proclamation,—
(a) to the Speaker, if the House is in session; or
(b) to the President, if the House is not in session,
a special sitting of the House shall be held within fourteen
days from the date on which such notice is received by
the Speaker, or, as the case may be, by the President, for
the purpose of considering such resolution.]
1 2

[ [(9)] The power conferred on the President by this
article shall include the power to issue different
Proclamations on different grounds, being war or external
aggression or 3[armed rebellion] or imminent danger of
war or external aggression or 3[armed rebellion], whether
or not there is a Proclamation already issued by the
President under clause (1) and such Proclamation is in
operation.
4

*

1

*

*

*

*]

Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (retrospectively).
Cl. (4) re-numbered as cl. (9) by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 37 (w.e.f 20-6-1979).
3
Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for “internal disturbance” (w.e.f 20-6-1979).
4
Cl. (5) omitted by s. 37, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

221

(Part XVIII.—Emergency Provisions.—Arts. 353-354.)
353. While a Proclamation of Emergency is in
operation, then—

Effect of
Proclamation of
Emergency.

(a) notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,
the executive power of the Union shall extend to the
giving of directions to any State as to the manner
in which the executive power thereof is to be
exercised;
(b) the power of Parliament to make laws with
respect to any matter shall include power to make
laws conferring powers and imposing duties, or
authorising the conferring of powers and the
imposition of duties, upon the Union or officers and
authorities of the Union as respects that matter,
notwithstanding that it is one which is not
enumerated in the Union List:
1

[Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency
is in operation only in any part of the territory of India,—
(i) the executive power of the Union to give
directions under clause (a), and
(ii) the power of Parliament to make laws under
clause (b),
shall also extend to any State other than a State in which
or in any part of which the Proclamation of Emergency
is in operation if and in so far as the security of India or
any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities
in or in relation to the part of the territory of India in
which the Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.]
354. (1) The President may, while a Proclamation of
Emergency is in operation, by order direct that all or any
of the provisions of articles 268 to 279 shall for such
period, not extending in any case beyond the expiration
of the financial year in which such Proclamation ceases
to operate, as may be specified in the order, have effect
subject to such exceptions or modifications as he thinks
fit.
1

Application of
provisions relating
to distribution of
revenues while a
Proclamation of
Emergency is in
operation.

Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act 1976, s. 49 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

222

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVIII.—Emergency Provisions.—Arts. 354—356.)
(2) Every order made under clause (1) shall, as soon
as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of
Parliament.
Duty of the Union
to protect States
against external
aggression and
internal
disturbance.

355. It shall be the duty of the Union to protect every
State against external aggression and internal disturbance
and to ensure that the Government of every State is
carried on in accordance with the provisions of this
Constitution.

Provisions in case
of failure of
constitutional
machinery in
States.

356. (1) If the President, on receipt of a report from the
Governor 1*** of a State or otherwise, is satisfied that a
situation has arisen in which the Government of the State
cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions
of this Constitution, the President may by Proclamation—
(a) assume to himself all or any of the functions of
the Government of the State and all or any of the
powers vested in or exercisable by the Governor 2***
or any body or authority in the State other than the
Legislature of the State;
(b) declare that the powers of the Legislature of the
State shall be exercisable by or under the authority
of Parliament;
(c) make such incidental and consequential
provisions as appear to the President to be necessary
or desirable for giving effect to the objects of the
Proclamation, including provisions for suspending
in whole or in part the operation of any provisions
of this Constitution relating to any body or authority
in the State:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall authorise
the President to assume to himself any of the powers
vested in or exercisable by a High Court, or to suspend
in whole or in part the operation of any provision of this
Constitution relating to High Courts.

1
The words “or Rajpramukh“ omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2
The words “or Rajpramukh, as the case may be” omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

223

(Part XVIII.—Emergency Provisions.—Art. 356.)
(2) Any such Proclamation may be revoked or varied
by a subsequent Proclamation.
(3) Every Proclamation under this article shall be
laid before each House of Parliament and shall, except
where it is a Proclamation revoking a previous
Proclamation, cease to operate at the expiration of two
months unless before the expiration of that period it has
been approved by resolutions of both Houses of
Parliament:
Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being a
Proclamation revoking a previous Proclamation) is issued
at a time when the House of the People is dissolved or
the dissolution of the House of the People takes place
during the period of two months referred to in this clause,
and if a resolution approving the Proclamation has been
passed by the Council of States, but no resolution with
respect to such Proclamation has been passed by the
House of the People before the expiration of that period,
the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration
of thirty days from the date on which the House of the
People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the
expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution
approving the Proclamation has been also passed by the
House of the People.
(4) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked,
cease to operate on the expiration of a period of 1[six
months from the date of issue of the Proclamation]:
Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving
the continuance in force of such a Proclamation is passed
by both Houses of Parliament, the Proclamation shall, unless
revoked, continue in force for a further period of
2
[six months] from the date on which under this clause it
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 38, for “one year
from the date of the passing of the second of the resolutions approving the Proclamation
under clause (3)” (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). The words “one year” were subs. for the original words
“six months” by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 50 (w.e.f.
3-1-1977).
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 38, for “one year”
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979). The words “one year” were subs. for the original words “six months” by
the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 50 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

224

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVIII.—Emergency Provisions.—Art. 356.)
would otherwise have ceased to operate, but no such
Proclamation shall in any case remain in force for more
than three years:
Provided further that if the dissolution of the House
of the People takes place during any such period of 1[six
months] and a resolution approving the continuance in
force of such Proclamation has been passed by the Council
of States, but no resolution with respect to the continuance
in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the
House of the People during the said period, the
Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of
thirty days from the date on which the House of the
People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the
expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution
approving the continuance in force of the Proclamation
has been also passed by the House of the People:
2

[Provided also that in the case of the Proclamation
issued under clause (1) on the 11th day of May, 1987 with
respect to the State of Punjab, the reference in the first
proviso to this clause to “three years” shall be construed
as a reference to 3[five years].]
4

[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(4), a resolution with respect to the continuance in force
of a Proclamation approved under clause (3) for any
period beyond the expiration of one year from the date of
issue of such Proclamation shall not be passed by either
House of Parliament unless—
(a) a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation,
in the whole of India or, as the case may be, in the
whole or any part of the State, at the time of the
passing of such resolution, and

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 38, for “one year“
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979). The words “one year” were subs. for the original words “six months” by
the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 50 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2

Ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2.

3

Successively subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2 and
the Constitution (Sixty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1991, s. 2 to read as above.
4
Subs by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 38, for cl. (5) (w.e.f.
20-6-1979). Cl. (5) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 6
(retrospectively).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

225

(Part XVIII.—Emergency Provisions.—Arts. 356-357.)
(b) the Election Commission certifies that the
continuance in force of the Proclamation approved
under clause (3) during the period specified in such
resolution is necessary on account of difficulties in
holding general elections to the Legislative Assembly
of the State concerned:]
1

[Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to
the Proclamation issued under clause (1) on the 11th day
of May, 1987 with respect to the State of Punjab.]
357. (1) Where by a Proclamation issued under clause (1)
of article 356, it has been declared that the powers of the
Legislature of the State shall be exercisable by or under
the authority of Parliament, it shall be competent—

Exercise of
legislative powers
under Proclamation
issued under article
356.

(a) for Parliament to confer on the President the
power of the Legislature of the State to make laws,
and to authorise the President to delegate, subject to
such conditions as he may think fit to impose, the
power so conferred to any other authority to be
specified by him in that behalf;
(b) for Parliament, or for the President or other
authority in whom such power to make laws is
vested under sub-clause (a), to make laws conferring
powers and imposing duties, or authorising the
conferring of powers and the imposition of
duties, upon the Union or officers and authorities
thereof;
(c) for the President to authorise when the House
of the People is not in session expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of the State pending the sanction
of such expenditure by Parliament.
5

[(2) Any law made in exercise of the power of the
Legislature of the State by Parliament or the President or
other authority referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (1)

1
Omitted by the Constitution (Sixty-third Amendment) Act, 1989, s. 2 (w.e.f. 6-1-1990).
Ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 51, for cl. (2)
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

226

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVIII.—Emergency Provisions.—Arts. 357-358.)
which Parliament or the President or such other authority
would not, but for the issue of a Proclamation under
article 356, have been competent to make shall, after the
Proclamation has ceased to operate, continue in force
until altered or repealed or amended by a competent
Legislature or other authority.]
Suspension of
provisions of
article 19 during
emergencies.

358. 1[(1)] 2[While a Proclamation of Emergency
declaring that the security of India or any part of the
territory thereof is threatened by war or by external
aggression is in operation], nothing in article 19 shall
restrict the power of the State as defined in Part III to
make any law or to take any executive action which the
State would but for the provisions contained in that Part
be competent to make or to take, but any law so made
shall, to the extent of the incompetency, cease to have
effect as soon as the Proclamation ceases to operate, except
as respects things done or omitted to be done before the
law so ceases to have effect:
3

[Provided that 4[where such Proclamation of
Emergency] is in operation only in any part of the territory
of India, any such law may be made, or any such executive
action may be taken, under this article in relation to or in
any State or Union territory in which or in any part of
which the Proclamation of Emergency is not in operation,
if and in so far as the security of India or any part of the
territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation
to the part of the territory of India in which the
Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.]
5

[(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply—

(a) to any law which does not contain a recital
to the effect that such law is in relation to the
1
Art. 358 re-numbered as cl. (1) thereof by by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)
Act, 1978, s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2
Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for “While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation” (w.e.f.
20-6-1979).
3
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 52 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
4
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 39, for “where a
Proclamation of Emergency” (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
5
Ins. by s. 39, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

227

(Part XVIII.—Emergency Provisions.—Arts. 358-359.)
Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is
made; or
(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than
under a law containing such a recital.]
359. (1) Where a Proclamation of Emergency is in
operation, the President may by order declare that the
right to move any court for the enforcement of such of
1
[the rights conferred by Part III (except articles 20 and
21)] as may be mentioned in the order and all proceedings
pending in any court for the enforcement of the rights so
mentioned shall remain suspended for the period during
which the Proclamation is in force or for such shorter
period as may be specified in the order.

Suspension of the
enforcement of the
rights conferred by
Part III during
emergencies.

2

[(1A) While an order made under clause (1)
mentioning any of 1[the rights conferred by Part III
(except articles 20 and 21)] is in operation, nothing in
that Part conferring those rights shall restrict the power
of the State as defined in the said Part to make any law
or to take any executive action which the State would
but for the provisions contained in that Part be competent
to make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the
extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect as soon
as the order aforesaid ceases to operate, except as respects
things done or omitted to be done before the law so
ceases to have effect:]
3

[Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency
is in operation only in any part of the territory of India,
any such law may be made, or any such executive action
may be taken, under this article in relation to or in any
State or Union territory in which or in any part of which
the Proclamation of Emergency is not in operation, if
and in so far as the security of India or any part of the
territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in
relation to the part of the territory of India in which the
Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.]

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 40, for “the rights
conferred by Part III” (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 7 (retrospectively).
3
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 53 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

228

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVIII.—Emergency Provisions.—Arts. 359—360.)
1

[(1B) Nothing in clause (1A) shall apply—

(a) to any law which does not contain a recital to
the effect that such law is in relation to the
Proclamation of Emergency in operation when it is
made; or
(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than
under a law containing such a recital.]
(2) An order made as aforesaid may extend to the
whole or any part of the territory of India:
2

[Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency
is in operation only in a part of the territory of India, any
such order shall not extend to any other part of the territory
of India unless the President, being satisfied that the
security of India or any part of the territory thereof is
threatened by activities in or in relation to the part of the
territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency
is in operation, considers such extension to be necessary.]
(3) Every order made under clause (1) shall, as soon
as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of
Parliament.
3
359A. [Application of this Part to the State of Punjab.]
Rep. by the Constitution (Sixty-third Amendment) Act, 1989,
s. 3 (w.e.f. 6-1-1990).

Provisions as to
financial
emergency.

360. (1) If the President is satisfied that a situation
has arisen whereby the financial stability or credit of
India or of any part of the territory thereof is threatened,
he may by a Proclamation make a declaration to that
effect.
4

[(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1)—

(a) may be revoked or varied by a subsequent
Proclamation;

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 40 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 53 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3
Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1988, s. 3. It shall cease to
operate on the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement of this Act, i.e.,
thirtieth day of March, 1988.
4
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 41, for cl. (2) (w.e.f.
20-6-1979).
2

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVIII.—Emergency Provisions.—Art. 360.)
(b) shall be laid before each House of Parliament;
(c) shall cease to operate at the expiration of two
months, unless before the expiration of that period
it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses
of Parliament:
Provided that if any such Proclamation is issued at
a time when the House of the People has been dissolved
or the dissolution of the House of the People takes place
during the period of two months referred to in subclause (c), and if a resolution approving the Proclamation
has been passed by the Council of States, but no
resolution with respect to such Proclamation has been
passed by the House of the People before the expiration
of that period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at
the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the
House of the People first sits after its reconstitution unless
before the expiration of the said period of thirty days a
resolution approving the Proclamation has been also
passed by the House of the People.]
(3) During the period any such Proclamation as is
mentioned in clause (1) is in operation, the executive
authority of the Union shall extend to the giving of
directions to any State to observe such canons of financial
propriety as may be specified in the directions, and to the
giving of such other directions as the President may deem
necessary and adequate for the purpose.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution—
(a) any such direction may include—
(i) a provision requiring the reduction of
salaries and allowances of all or any class of
persons serving in connection with the affairs of
a State;
(ii) a provision requiring all Money Bills or
other Bills to which the provisions of article 207
apply to be reserved for the consideration of the
President after they are passed by the Legislature
of the State;

229

230

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XVIII.—Emergency Provisions.—Art. 360.)
(b) it shall be competent for the President during
the period any Proclamation issued under this article
is in operation to issue directions for the reduction of
salaries and allowances of all or any class of persons
serving in connection with the affairs of the Union
including the Judges of the Supreme Court and the
High Courts.
1

*

*

*

*

*

1
Cl. (5) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 8
(retrospectively) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 41 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

PART XIX
MISCELLANEOUS
361. (1) The President, or the Governor or
Rajpramukh of a State, shall not be answerable to any
court for the exercise and performance of the powers
and duties of his office or for any act done or purporting
to be done by him in the exercise and performance of
those powers and duties:

Protection of
President and
Governors and
Rajpramukhs.

Provided that the conduct of the President may be
brought under review by any court, tribunal or body
appointed or designated by either House of Parliament
for the investigation of a charge under article 61:
Provided further that nothing in this clause shall be
construed as restricting the right of any person to bring
appropriate proceedings against the Government of India
or the Government of a State.
(2) No criminal proceedings whatsoever shall be
instituted or continued against the President, or the
Governor 1*** of a State, in any court during his term of
office.
(3) No process for the arrest or imprisonment of the
President, or the Governor 1*** of a State, shall issue
from any court during his term of office.
(4) No civil proceedings in which relief is claimed
against the President, or the Governor 1*** of a State,
shall be instituted during his term of office in any court
in respect of any act done or purporting to be done by
him in his personal capacity, whether before or after he
entered upon his office as President, or as Governor 1***
of such State, until the expiration of two months next
after notice in writing has been delivered to the President
or the Governor 2***, as the case may be, or left at his
office stating the nature of the proceedings, the cause of
action therefor, the name, description and place of
1
The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act,
1956, s. 29 and Sch.
2
The words “or the Rajpramukh” omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.

231

232

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIX.—Miscellaneous.—Arts. 361—361B.)
residence of the party by whom such proceedings are to
be instituted and the relief which he claims.
Protection of
publication of
proceedings of
Parliament and
State Legislatures.

1

[361A. (1) No person shall be liable to any
proceedings, civil or criminal, in any court in respect of
the publication in a newspaper of a substantially true
report of any proceedings of either House of Parliament
or the Legislative Assembly, or, as the case may be, either
House of the Legislature, of a State, unless the publication
is proved to have been made with malice:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to
the publication of any report of the proceedings of a
secret sitting of either House of Parliament or the
Legislative Assembly, or, as the case may be, either House
of the Legislature, of a State.
(2) Clause (1) shall apply in relation to reports or
matters broadcast by means of wireless telegraphy as
part of any programme or service provided by means of
a broadcasting station as it applies in relation to reports
or matters published in a newspaper.
Explanation.—In this article, “newspaper” includes a
news agency report containing material for publication
in a newspaper.]

Disqualification
for appointment
on remunerative
political post.

2

[361B. A member of a House belonging to any
political party who is disqualified for being a member of
the House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth Schedule shall
also be disqualified to hold any remunerative political
post for duration of the period commencing from the
date of his disqualification till the date on which the
term of his office as such member would expire or till the
date on which he contests an election to a House and is
declared elected, whichever is earlier.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article,—
(a) the expression “House” has the meaning
assigned to it in clause (a) of paragraph 1 of the
Tenth Schedule;

1
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 42 (w.e.f.
20-6-1979).
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 4.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

233

(Part XIX.—Miscellaneous.—Arts. 361B—363.)
(b) the expression “remunerative political post”
means any office—
(i) under the Government of India or the
Government of a State where the salary or
remuneration for such office is paid out of the
public revenue of the Government of India or
the Government of the State, as the case may be;
or
(ii) under a body, whether incorporated or
not, which is wholly or partially owned by the
Government of India or the Government of a
State and the salary or remuneration for such
office is paid by such body,
except where such salary or remuneration paid is
compensatory in nature.
362. [Rights and privileges of Rulers of Indian States.]
Rep. by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act,
1971, s. 2.
363. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution but subject to the provisions of article 143,
neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have
jurisdiction in any dispute arising out of any provision
of a treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or
other similar instrument which was entered into or
executed before the commencement of this Constitution
by any Ruler of an Indian State and to which the
Government of the Dominion of India or any of its
predecessor Governments was a party and which has or
has been continued in operation after such commencement,
or in any dispute in respect of any right accruing under
or any liability or obligation arising out of any of the
provisions of this Constitution relating to any such treaty,
agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar
instrument.
(2) In this article—
(a) “Indian State” means any territory recognised
before the commencement of this Constitution by His
Majesty or the Government of the Dominion of India
as being such a State; and
(b) “Ruler” includes the Prince, Chief or other
person recognised before such commencement by
His Majesty or the Government of the Dominion of
India as the Ruler of any Indian State.

Bar to interference
by courts in
disputes arising
out of certain
treaties,
agreements, etc.

234

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIX.—Miscellaneous.—Arts. 363A-364.)
1

Recognition
granted to Rulers
of Indian States
to cease and
privy purses to
be abolished.

[363A. Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution or in any law for the time being in force—
(a) the Prince, Chief or other person who, at any
time before the commencement of the Constitution
(Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, was recognised
by the President as the Ruler of an Indian State or
any person who, at any time before such
commencement, was recognised by the President as
the successor of such ruler shall, on and from such
commencement, cease to be recognised as such Ruler
or the successor of such Ruler;
(b) on and from the commencement of the
Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971,
privy purse is abolished and all rights, liabilities and
obligations in respect of privy purse are extinguished
and accordingly the Ruler or, as the case may be, the
successor of such Ruler, referred to in clause (a) or
any other person shall not be paid any sum as privy
purse.]

Special provisions
as to major ports
and aerodromes.

364. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution, the President may by public notification
direct that as from such date as may be specified in the
notification—
(a) any law made by Parliament or by the
Legislature of a State shall not apply to any major
port or aerodrome or shall apply thereto subject to
such exceptions or modifications as may be specified
in the notification, or
(b) any existing law shall cease to have effect in
any major port or aerodrome except as respects things
done or omitted to be done before the said date, or
shall in its application to such port or aerodrome
have effect subject to such exceptions or modifications
as may be specified in the notification.
(2) In this article—
(a) “major port” means a port declared to be a
major port by or under any law made by Parliament
or any existing law and includes all areas for the
time being included within the limits of such port;
(b) “aerodrome” means aerodrome as defined for
the purposes of the enactments relating to airways,
aircraft and air navigation.

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3.

235

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIX.—Miscellaneous.—Arts. 365-366.)
365. Where any State has failed to comply with, or to
give effect to, any directions given in the exercise of the
executive power of the Union under any of the provisions
of this Constitution, it shall be lawful for the President to
hold that a situation has arisen in which the Government
of the State cannot be carried on in accordance with the
provisions of this Constitution.
366. In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following expressions have the meanings
hereby respectively assigned to them, that is to say—
(1) “agricultural income” means agricultural
income as defined for the purposes of the enactments
relating to Indian income-tax;
(2) “an Anglo-Indian” means a person whose
father or any of whose other male progenitors in the
male line is or was of European descent but who is
domiciled within the territory of India and is or was
born within such territory of parents habitually
resident therein and not established there for
temporary purposes only;
(3) “article” means an article of this Constitution;
(4) “borrow” includes the raising of money by the
grant of annuities, and “loan” shall be construed
accordingly;
1
*
*
*
*
(5) “clause” means a clause of the article in which
the expression occurs;
(6) “corporation tax” means any tax on income,
so far as that tax is payable by companies and is a
tax in the case of which the following conditions are
fulfilled:—
(a) that it is not chargeable in respect of
agricultural income;
(b) that no deduction in respect of the tax
paid by companies is, by any enactments which
may apply to the tax, authorised to be made
from dividends payable by the companies to
individuals;
(c) that no provision exists for taking the tax
so paid into account in computing for the

Effect of failure
to comply with,
or to give effect
to, directions
given by the
Union.

Definitions.

1
Cl. (4A) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 54
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 11
(w.e.f. 13-4-1978).

236

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIX.—Miscellaneous.—Art. 366.)
purposes of Indian income-tax the total income
of individuals receiving such dividends, or in
computing the Indian income-tax payable by, or
refundable to, such individuals;
(7) “corresponding Province”, “corresponding
Indian State” or “corresponding State” means in
cases of doubt such Province, Indian State or State as
may be determined by the President to be the
corresponding Province, the corresponding Indian
State or the corresponding State, as the case may be,
for the particular purpose in question;
(8) “debt” includes any liability in respect of any
obligation to repay capital sums by way of annuities
and any liability under any guarantee, and “debt
charges” shall be construed accordingly;
(9) “estate duty” means a duty to be assessed on
or by reference to the principal value, ascertained in
accordance with such rules as may be prescribed by
or under laws made by Parliament or the Legislature
of a State relating to the duty, of all property passing
upon death or deemed, under the provisions of the
said laws, so to pass;
(10) “existing law” means any law, Ordinance,
order, bye-law, rule or regulation passed or made
before the commencement of this Constitution by any
Legislature, authority or person having power to
make such a law, Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule or
regulation;
(11) “Federal Court” means the Federal Court
constituted under the Government of India Act, 1935;
(12) “goods” includes all materials, commodities,
and articles;
(13) “guarantee” includes any obligation
undertaken before the commencement of this
Constitution to make payments in the event of the
profits of an undertaking falling short of a specified
amount;
(14) “High Court” means any Court which is
deemed for the purposes of this Constitution to be a
High Court for any State and includes—
(a) any Court in the territory of India
constituted or reconstituted under this Constitution
as a High Court, and

237

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIX.—Miscellaneous.—Art. 366.)
(b) any other Court in the territory of India
which may be declared by Parliament by law to
be a High Court for all or any of the purposes of
this Constitution;
(15) “Indian State” means any territory which
the Government of the Dominion of India recognised
as such a State;
(16) “Part” means a Part of this Constitution;
(17) “pension” means a pension, whether
contributory or not, of any kind whatsoever payable
to or in respect of any person, and includes retired
pay so payable; a gratuity so payable and any sum
or sums so payable by way of the return, with or
without interest thereon or any other addition
thereto, of subscriptions to a provident fund;
(18) “Proclamation of Emergency” means a
Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 352;
(19) “public notification” means a notification in
the Gazette of India, or, as the case may be, the Official
Gazette of a State;
(20) “railway” does not include—
(a) a tramway wholly within a municipal area,
or
(b) any other line of communication wholly
situate in one State and declared by Parliament by
law not to be a railway;
1

*

*

*

*

*

*

2
[(22) “Ruler” means the Prince, Chief or other
person who, at any time before the commencement of
the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act,
1971, was recognised by the President as the Ruler
of an Indian State or any person who, at any time
before such commencement, was recognised by the
President as the successor of such Ruler;]

(23) “Schedule” means a Schedule to this
Constitution;
(24) “Scheduled Castes” means such castes, races
or tribes or parts of or groups within such castes,
1
2

Cl. (21) omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 4, for cl. (22).

238

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIX.—Miscellaneous.—Art. 366.)
races or tribes as are deemed under article 341 to be
Scheduled Castes for the purposes of this
Constitution;
(25) “Scheduled Tribes” means such tribes or
tribal communities or parts of or groups within such
tribes or tribal communities as are deemed under
article 342 to be Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of
this Constitution;
(26) “securities” includes stock;
1

*

*

*

*

*

*

(27) “sub-clause” means a sub-clause of the clause
in which the expression occurs;
(28) “taxation” includes the imposition of any tax
or impost, whether general or local or special, and
“tax” shall be construed accordingly;
(29) “tax on income” includes a tax in the nature
of an excess profits tax;
2

[(29A) “tax on the sale or purchase of goods”
includes—
(a) a tax on the transfer, otherwise than in
pursuance of a contract, of property in any goods
for cash, deferred payment or other valuable
consideration;
(b) a tax on the transfer of property in goods
(whether as goods or in some other form)
involved in the execution of a works contract;
(c) a tax on the delivery of goods on hirepurchase or any system of payment by
instalments;
(d) a tax on the transfer of the right to use
any goods for any purpose (whether or not for a
specified period) for cash, deferred payment or
other valuable consideration;
(e) a tax on the supply of goods by any
unincorporated association or body of persons
to a member thereof for cash, deferred payment
or other valuable consideration;
1
Cl. (26A) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 54
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 11
(w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982, s. 4.

239

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XIX.—Miscellaneous.—Arts. 366-367.)
(f) a tax on the supply, by way of or as part
of any service or in any other manner
whatsoever, of goods, being food or any other
article for human consumption or any drink
(whether or not intoxicating), where such supply
or service, is for cash, deferred payment or other
valuable consideration,
and such transfer, delivery or supply of any goods shall
be deemed to be a sale of those goods by the person
making the transfer, delivery or supply and a purchase
of those goods by the person to whom such transfer,
delivery or supply is made;]
1

[(30) “Union territory” means any Union
territory specified in the First Schedule and includes
any other territory comprised within the territory of
India but not specified in that Schedule.]
367. (1) Unless the context otherwise requires, the
General Clauses Act, 1897, shall, subject to any
adaptations and modifications that may be made therein
under article 372, apply for the interpretation of this
Constitution as it applies for the interpretation of an Act
of the Legislature of the Dominion of India.

Interpretation.

(2) Any reference in this Constitution to Acts or laws
of, or made by, Parliament, or to Acts or laws of, or
made by, the Legislature of a State 2***, shall be construed
as including a reference to an Ordinance made by the
President or, to an Ordinance made by a Governor 3***,
as the case may be.
(3) For the purposes of this Constitution “foreign
State” means any State other than India:
Provided that, subject to the provisions of any law
made by Parliament, the President may by order4 declare
any State not to be a foreign State for such purposes as
may be specified in the order.

1

Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for cl. (30).
The words and letters “specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule” omitted by
s. 29 and Sch., ibid.
3
The words “or Rajpramukh “ omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid.
4
See the Constitution (Declaration as to Foreign States) Order, 1950 (C.O. 2).
2

PART XX
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
1

[Power of
Parliament to
amend the
Constitution and
procedure
therefor.]

368. 2 [(1) Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution, Parliament may in exercise of its constituent
power amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any
provision of this Constitution in accordance with the
procedure laid down in this article.]
3
[(2)] An amendment of this Constitution may be
initiated only by the introduction of a Bill for the purpose
in either House of Parliament, and when the Bill is passed
in each House by a majority of the total membership of
that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds
of the members of that House present and voting, 4[it
shall be presented to the President who shall give his
assent to the Bill and thereupon] the Constitution shall
stand amended in accordance with the terms of the Bill:

Provided that if such amendment seeks to make any
change in—
(a) article 54, article 55, article 73, article 162 or
article 241, or
(b) Chapter IV of Part V, Chapter V of Part VI, or
Chapter I of Part XI, or
(c) any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule, or
(d) the representation of States in Parliament, or
(e) the provisions of this article,
the amendment shall also require to be ratified by the
Legislatures of not less than one-half of the States 5*** by
resolutions to that effect passed by those Legislatures
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3, for “Procedure
for the amendment of the Constitution”.
2
Ins. by s. 3, ibid.
3
Art. 368 renumbered as cl. (2) thereof by s. 3, ibid.
4
Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “it shall be presented to the President for his assent and upon
such assent being given to the Bill,”.
5
The words and letters “specified in Parts A and B of the First Schedule” omitted by the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.

240

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

241

(Part XX.—Amendment of the Constitution.—Art. 368.)
before the Bill making provision for such amendment is
presented to the President for assent.
1

[(3) Nothing in article 13 shall apply to any
amendment made under this article.]
2

[(4) No amendment of this Constitution (including
the provisions of Part III) made or purporting to have
been made under this article [whether before or after the
commencement of section 55 of the Constitution (Fortysecond Amendment) Act, 1976] shall be called in question
in any court on any ground.
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that there shall be no limitation whatever on the
constituent power of Parliament to amend by way of
addition, variation or repeal the provisions of this
Constitution under this article.]

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3.
Cls. (4) and (5) were ins. in article 368 by s. 55 of the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act, 1976. This section has been declared invalid by the Supreme Court in
Minerva Mills Ltd. and Others Vs. Union of India and Others (1980) 2 S.C.C. 591.
2

PART XXI
1

[TEMPORARY, TRANSITIONAL
AND SPECIAL PROVISIONS]

Temporary power
to Parliament to
make laws with
respect to certain
matters in the State
List as if they were
matters in the
Concurrent List.

369. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,
Parliament shall, during a period of five years from
the commencement of this Constitution, have power
to make laws with respect to the following matters as
if they were enumerated in the Concurrent List,
namely:—
(a) trade and commerce within a State in, and
the production, supply and distribution of, cotton
and woollen textiles, raw cotton (including ginned
cotton and unginned cotton or kapas), cotton
seed, paper (including newsprint), food-stuffs
(including edible oilseeds and oil), cattle fodder
(including oil-cakes and other concentrates), coal
(including coke and derivatives of coal), iron, steel
and mica;
(b) offences against laws with respect to any of
the matters mentioned in clause (a), jurisdiction and
powers of all courts except the Supreme Court with
respect to any of those matters, and fees in respect
of any of those matters but not including fees taken
in any court;
but any law made by Parliament, which Parliament
would not but for the provisions of this article have
been competent to make, shall, to the extent of the
incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration of
the said period, except as respects things done or
omitted to be done before the expiration thereof.

1
Subs. by the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 2, for “TEMPORARY
AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS” (w.e.f. 1-12-1963).

242

243

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 370.)
1

[370. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution,—
(a) the provisions of article 238 shall not apply in
relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir;

Temporary
provisions with
respect to the State
of Jammu and
Kashmir.

(b) the power of Parliament to make laws for the
said State shall be limited to—
(i) those matters in the Union List and the
Concurrent List which, in consultation with the
Government of the State, are declared by the
President to correspond to matters specified in
the Instrument of Accession governing the
accession of the State to the Dominion of India as
the matters with respect to which the Dominion
Legislature may make laws for that State; and
(ii) such other matters in the said Lists as, with
the concurrence of the Government of the State,
the President may by order specify.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, the
Government of the State means the person for the time
being recognised by the President as the Maharaja of
Jammu and Kashmir acting on the advice of the Council
of Ministers for the time being in office under the
Maharaja’s Proclamation dated the fifth day of March,
1948;
(c) the provisions of article 1 and of this article
shall apply in relation to that State;
(d) such of the other provisions of this Constitution
shall apply in relation to that State subject to such
1
In exercise of the powers conferred by this article the President, on the recommendation
of the Constituent Assembly of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, declared that, as from the
17th day of November, 1952, the said art. 370 shall be operative with the modification that
for the Explanation in cl. (1) thereof, the following Explanation is substituted, namely:—

“Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, the Government of the State means
the person for the time being recognised by the President on the recommendation of the
Legislative Assembly of the State as the *Sadar-I-Riyasat of Jammu and Kashmir,
acting on the advice of the Council of Ministers of the State for the time being in office.”.
(Ministry of Law Order No. C.O. 44, dated the 15th November, 1952).
*Now “Governor”.

244

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Arts. 370-371.)
exceptions and modifications as the President may
by order1 specify:
Provided that no such order which relates to the
matters specified in the Instrument of Accession of
the State referred to in paragraph (i) of sub-clause (b)
shall be issued except in consultation with the
Government of the State:
Provided further that no such order which relates
to matters other than those referred to in the last
preceding proviso shall be issued except with the
concurrence of that Government.
(2) If the concurrence of the Government of the State
referred to in paragraph (ii) of sub-clause (b) of clause (1)
or in the second proviso to sub-clause (d) of that clause
be given before the Constituent Assembly for the purpose
of framing the Constitution of the State is convened, it
shall be placed before such Assembly for such decision
as it may take thereon.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing
provisions of this article, the President may, by public
notification, declare that this article shall cease to be
operative or shall be operative only with such exceptions
and modifications and from such date as he may specify:
Provided that the recommendation of the Constituent
Assembly of the State referred to in clause (2) shall be
necessary before the President issues such a notification.
Special provision
with respect to
the States of 4***
Maharashtra and
Gujarat.

2

[371. 3*

*

*

*

(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,
the President may by order made with respect to 5[the

1
See the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954 (C.O. 48) as
amended from time to time, in Appendix I.
2
Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 22, for art. 371.
3
Cl. (1) omitted by the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 2, (w.e.f.
1-7-1974).
4
The words “Andhra Pradesh,” omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-7-1974).
5
Subs. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 85, for “the State of
Bombay” (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

245

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Arts. 371-371A.)
State of Maharashtra or Gujarat], provide for any special
responsibility of the Governor for—
(a) the establishment of separate development
boards for Vidarbha, Marathwada, 1[and the rest of
Maharashtra or, as the case may be,] Saurashtra,
Kutch and the rest of Gujarat with the provision that
a report on the working of each of these boards will
be placed each year before the State Legislative
Assembly;
(b) the equitable allocation of funds for
developmental expenditure over the said areas,
subject to the requirements of the State as a whole;
and
(c) an equitable arrangement providing adequate
facilities for technical education and vocational
training, and adequate opportunities for employment
in services under the control of the State Government,
in respect of all the said areas, subject to the
requirements of the State as a whole.]
2

[371A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution,—

Special provision
with respect to the
State of Nagaland.

(a) no Act of Parliament in respect of—
(i) religious or social practices of the Nagas,
(ii) Naga customary law and procedure,
(iii) administration of civil and criminal justice
involving decisions according to Naga customary
law,
(iv) ownership and transfer of land and its
resources,
shall apply to the State of Nagaland unless the Legislative
Assembly of Nagaland by a resolution so decides;
(b) the Governor of Nagaland shall have special
responsibility with respect to law and order in the
1
Subs. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 85, for “the rest of
Maharashtra,” (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
2
Ins. by the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-12-1963).

246

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 371A.)
State of Nagaland for so long as in his opinion internal
disturbances occurring in the Naga Hills-Tuensang
Area immediately before the formation of that State
continue therein or in any part thereof and in the
discharge of his functions in relation thereto the
Governor shall, after consulting the Council of
Ministers, exercise his individual judgment as to the
action to be taken:
Provided that if any question arises whether any
matter is or is not a matter as respects which the
Governor is under this sub-clause required to act in
the exercise of his individual judgment, the decision
of the Governor in his discretion shall be final, and
the validity of anything done by the Governor shall
not be called in question on the ground that he ought
or ought not to have acted in the exercise of his
individual judgment:
Provided further that if the President on receipt of
a report from the Governor or otherwise is satisfied
that it is no longer necessary for the Governor to
have special responsibility with respect to law and
order in the State of Nagaland, he may by order
direct that the Governor shall cease to have such
responsibility with effect from such date as may be
specified in the order;
(c) in making his recommendation with respect to
any demand for a grant, the Governor of Nagaland
shall ensure that any money provided by the
Government of India out of the Consolidated Fund of
India for any specific service or purpose is included
in the demand for a grant relating to that service or
purpose and not in any other demand;
(d) as from such date as the Governor of
Nagaland may by public notification in this behalf
specify, there shall be established a regional council
for the Tuensang district consisting of thirty-five
members and the Governor shall in his discretion
make rules providing for—
(i) the composition of the regional council and
the manner in which the members of the regional
council shall be chosen:

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 371A.)
Provided that the Deputy Commissioner of the
Tuensang district shall be the Chairman ex officio
of the regional council and the Vice-Chairman of
the regional council shall be elected by the
members thereof from amongst themselves;
(ii) the qualifications for being chosen as, and
for being, members of the regional council;
(iii) the term of office of, and the salaries and
allowances, if any, to be paid to members of, the
regional council;
(iv) the procedure and conduct of business of
the regional council;
(v) the appointment of officers and staff of the
regional council and their conditions of services;
and
(vi) any other matter in respect of which it is
necessary to make rules for the constitution and
proper functioning of the regional council.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,
for a period of ten years from the date of the formation
of the State of Nagaland or for such further period
as the Governor may, on the recommendation of the
regional council, by public notification specify in this
behalf,—
(a) the administration of the Tuensang district shall
be carried on by the Governor;
(b) where any money is provided by the
Government of India to the Government of Nagaland
to meet the requirements of the State of Nagaland
as a whole, the Governor shall in his discretion
arrange for an equitable allocation of that money
between the Tuensang district and the rest of the
State;

247

248

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 371A.)
(c) no Act of the Legislature of Nagaland shall
apply to Tuensang district unless the Governor, on
the recommendation of the regional council, by public
notification so directs and the Governor in giving
such direction with respect to any such Act may
direct that the Act shall in its application to the
Tuensang district or any part thereof have effect
subject to such exceptions or modifications as the
Governor may specify on the recommendation of the
regional council:
Provided that any direction given under this
sub-clause may be given so as to have retrospective
effect;
(d) the Governor may make regulations for the
peace, progress and good Government of the
Tuensang district and any regulations so made may
repeal or amend with retrospective effect, if necessary,
any Act of Parliament or any other law which is for
the time being applicable to that district;
(e) (i) one of the members representing the
Tuensang district in the Legislative Assembly of
Nagaland shall be appointed Minister for Tuensang
affairs by the Governor on the advice of the Chief
Minister and the Chief Minister in tendering his
advice shall act on the recommendation of the
majority of the members as aforesaid1;
(ii) the Minister for Tuensang affairs shall deal
with, and have direct access to the Governor on,
all matters relating to the Tuensang district but he
shall keep the Chief Minister informed about the
same;
1
Paragraph 2 of the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. X provides (w.e.f.
1-12-1963) that article 371A of the Constitution of India Shall have effect as if the following
Proviso were added to paragraph (i) of sub-clause (e) of clause (2) thereof, namely:—

“Provided that the Governor may, on the advice of the Chief Minister, appoint any
person as Minister for Tuensang affairs to act as such until such time as persons are
chosen in accordance with law to fill the seats allocated to the Tuensang district in the
Legislative Assembly of Nagaland.”.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 371A.)
(f) notwithstanding anything in the foregoing
provisions of this clause, the final decision on all
matters relating to the Tuensang district shall be
made by the Governor in his discretion;
(g) in articles 54 and 55 and clause (4) of article
80, references to the elected members of the Legislative
Assembly of a State or to each such member shall
include references to the members or member of the
Legislative Assembly of Nagaland elected by the
regional council established under this article;
(h) in article 170—
(i) clause (1) shall, in relation to the Legislative
Assembly of Nagaland, have effect as if for the
word “sixty”, the word “forty-six” had been
substituted;
(ii) in the said clause, the reference to direct
election from territorial constituencies in the State
shall include election by the members of the
regional council established under this article;
(iii) in clauses (2) and (3), references to
territorial constituencies shall mean references to
territorial constituencies in the Kohima and
Mokokchung districts.
(3) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of
the foregoing provisions of this article, the President may
by order do anything (including any adaptation or
modification of any other article) which appears to him
to be necessary for the purpose of removing that
difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the
expiration of three years from the date of the formation
of the State of Nagaland.
Explanation.—In this article, the Kohima,
Mokokchung and Tuensang districts shall have the same
meanings as in the State of Nagaland Act, 1962.]

249

250

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Arts. 371B-371C.)
Special provision
with respect to
the State of
Assam.

Special provision
with respect to
the State of
Manipur.

1

[371B. Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution, the President may, by order made with
respect to the State of Assam, provide for the constitution
and functions of a committee of the Legislative Assembly
of the State consisting of members of that Assembly
elected from the tribal areas specified in 2[Part I] of the
table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule
and such number of other members of that Assembly as
may be specified in the order and for the modifications
to be made in the rules of procedure of that Assembly
for the constitution and proper functioning of such
committee.]
3

[371C. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution, the President may, by order made with
respect to the State of Manipur, provide for the
constitution and functions of a committee of the
Legislative Assembly of the State consisting of members
of that Assembly elected from the Hill Areas of that State,
for the modifications to be made in the rules of business
of the Government and in the rules of procedure of the
Legislative Assembly of the State and for any special
responsibility of the Governor in order to secure the
proper functioning of such committee.
(2) The Governor shall annually, or whenever so
required by the President, make a report to the President
regarding the administration of the Hill Areas in the
State of Manipur and the executive power of the Union
shall extend to the giving of directions to the State as to
the administration of the said areas.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression “Hill
Areas” means such areas as the President may, by order,
declare to be Hill areas.]

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 4.
Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for
“Part A” (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
3
Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 5 (w.e.f.
15-2-1972).
2

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

251

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 371D.)
1
[371D. (1) The President may by order made with
respect to the State of Andhra Pradesh provide, having
regard to the requirements of the State as a whole, for
equitable opportunities and facilities for the people
belonging to different parts of the State, in the matter
of public employment and in the matter of education, and
different provisions may be made for various parts of the
State.

Special provisions
with respect to the
State of Andhra
Pradesh.

(2) An order made under clause (1) may, in
particular,—
(a) require the State Government to organise any
class or classes of posts in a civil service of, or any
class or classes of civil posts under, the State into
different local cadres for different parts of the State
and allot in accordance with such principles and
procedure as may be specified in the order the
persons holding such posts to the local cadres so
organised;
(b) specify any part or parts of the State which
shall be regarded as the local area—
(i) for direct recruitment to posts in any local
cadre (whether organised in pursuance of an order
under this article or constituted otherwise) under
the State Government;
(ii) for direct recruitment to posts in any cadre
under any local authority within the State; and
(iii) for the purposes of admission to any
University within the State or to any other
educational institution which is subject to the
control of the State Government;
(c) specify the extent to which, the manner in which
and the conditions subject to which, preference or
reservation shall be given or made—
(i) in the matter of direct recruitment to posts in
any such cadre referred to in sub-clause (b) as may
be specified in this behalf in the order;

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-7-1974).

252

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 371D.)
(ii) in the matter of admission to any such
University or other educational institution referred
to in sub-clause (b) as may be specified in this
behalf in the order,
to or in favour of candidates who have resided or studied
for any period specified in the order in the local area in
respect of such cadre, University or other educational
institution, as the case may be.
(3) The President may, by order, provide for the
constitution of an Administrative Tribunal for the State of
Andhra Pradesh to exercise such jurisdiction, powers
and authority [including any jurisdiction, power and
authority which immediately before the commencement
of the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973,
was exercisable by any court (other than the Supreme
Court) or by any tribunal or other authority] as may be
specified in the order with respect to the following matters,
namely:—
(a) appointment, allotment or promotion to such
class or classes of posts in any civil service of the
State, or to such class or classes of civil posts under
the State, or to such class or classes of posts under
the control of any local authority within the State, as
may be specified in the order;
(b) seniority of persons appointed, allotted or
promoted to such class or classes of posts in any
civil service of the State, or to such class or classes
of civil posts under the State, or to such class or
classes of posts under the control of any local
authority within the State, as may be specified in the
order;
(c) such other conditions of service of persons
appointed, allotted or promoted to such class or
classes of posts in any civil service of the State or to
such class or classes of civil posts under the State or
to such class or classes of posts under the control of
any local authority within the State, as may be
specified in the order.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

253

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 371D.)
(4) An order made under clause (3) may—
(a) authorise the Administrative Tribunal to
receive representations for the redress of grievances
relating to any matter within its jurisdiction as the
President may specify in the order and to make such
orders thereon as the Administrative Tribunal deems
fit;
(b) contain such provisions with respect to the
powers and authorities and procedure of the
Administrative Tribunal (including provisions with
respect to the powers of the Administrative Tribunal
to punish for contempt of itself) as the President
may deem necessary;
(c) provide for the transfer to the Administrative
Tribunal of such classes of proceedings, being
proceedings relating to matters within its jurisdiction
and pending before any court (other than the
Supreme Court) or tribunal or other authority
immediately before the commencement of such order,
as may be specified in the order;
(d) contain such supplemental, incidental and
consequential provisions (including provisions as to
fees and as to limitation, evidence or for the
application of any law for the time being in force
subject to any exceptions or modifications) as the
President may deem necessary.
1

(5) The Order of the Administrative Tribunal finally
disposing of any case shall become effective upon its
confirmation by the State Government or on the expiry of
three months from the date on which the order is made,
whichever is earlier:
Provided that the State Government may, by special
order made in writing and for reasons to be specified
1
In P. Sambamurthy and others vs. State of Andhara Pradesh and another (1987) 1 SCC,
p. 362, the Supreme Court declared cl. (5) of art. 371D along with the proviso to be
unconstitutional and void.

254

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 371D.)
therein, modify or annul any order of the Administrative
Tribunal before it becomes effective and in such a case,
the order of the Administrative Tribunal shall have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be.
(6) Every special order made by the State Government
under the proviso to clause (5) shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before both Houses of the State
Legislature.
(7) The High Court for the State shall not have any
powers of superintendence over the Administrative
Tribunal and no court (other than the Supreme Court) or
tribunal shall exercise any jurisdiction, power or authority
in respect of any matter subject to the jurisdiction, power
or authority of, or in relation to, the Administrative
Tribunal.
(8) If the President is satisfied that the continued
existence of the Administrative Tribunal is not necessary,
the President may by order abolish the Administrative
Tribunal and make such provisions in such order as he
may deem fit for the transfer and disposal of cases
pending before the Tribunal immediately before such
abolition.
(9) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order
of any court, tribunal or other authority,—
(a) no appointment, posting, promotion or transfer
of any person—
(i) made before the 1st day of November, 1956,
to any post under the Government of, or any local
authority within, the State of Hyderabad as it
existed before that date; or
(ii) made before the commencement of the
Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act,
1973, to any post under the Government of, or
any local or other authority within, the State of
Andhra Pradesh; and

255

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Arts. 371D—371F.)
(b) no action taken or thing done by or before any
person referred to in sub-clause (a),
shall be deemed to be illegal or void or ever to have
become illegal or void merely on the ground that the
appointment, posting, promotion or transfer of such
person was not made in accordance with any law, then
in force, providing for any requirement as to residence
within the State of Hyderabad or, as the case may be,
within any part of the State of Andhra Pradesh, in respect
of such appointment, posting, promotion or transfer.
(10) The provisions of this article and of any order
made by the President thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything in any other provision of this
Constitution or in any other law for the time being in
force.
371E. Parliament may by law provide for the
establishment of a University in the State of Andhra
Pradesh.]
1

[371F. Notwithstanding
Constitution,—

anything

in

this

Establishment of
Central University
in Andhra Pradesh.
Special provisions
with respect to the
State of Sikkim.

(a) the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim
shall consist of not less than thirty members;
(b) as from the date of commencement of the
Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975
(hereafter in this article referred to as the appointed
day)—
(i) the Assembly for Sikkim formed as a result
of the elections held in Sikkim in April, 1974 with
thirty-two members elected in the said elections
(hereinafter referred to as the sitting members)
shall be deemed to be the Legislative Assembly
of the State of Sikkim duly constituted under this
Constitution;
1

Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 3 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).

256

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 371F.)
(ii) the sitting members shall be deemed to be
the members of the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Sikkim duly elected under this
Constitution; and
(iii) the said Legislative Assembly of the State
of Sikkim shall exercise the powers and perform
the functions of the Legislative Assembly of a State
under this Constitution;
(c) in the case of the Assembly deemed to be the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim under
clause (b), the references to the period of 1[five years],
in clause (1) of article 172 shall be construed as
references to a period of 2[four years] and the said
period of 2[four years] shall be deemed to commence
from the appointed day;
(d) until other provisions are made by Parliament
by law, there shall be allotted to the State of Sikkim
one seat in the House of the People and the State of
Sikkim shall form one parliamentary constituency
to be called the parliamentary constituency for
Sikkim;
(e) the representative of the State of Sikkim in the
House of the People in existence on the appointed
day shall be elected by the members of the Legislative
Assembly of the State of Sikkim;
(f) Parliament may, for the purpose of protecting
the rights and interests of the different sections of
the population of Sikkim make provision for the
number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Sikkim which may be filled by candidates
belonging to such sections and for the delimitation
of the assembly constituencies from which candidates
1
Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 43, for “six years”
(w.e.f. 6-9-1979). The words “six years” were subs. for the original words “five years” by the
Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 56 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2

Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 43, for “five years”
(w.e.f. 6-9-1979). The words “five years” were subs. for the original words “four years” by
the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 56 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 371F.)
belonging to such sections alone may stand for
election to the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Sikkim;
(g) the Governor of Sikkim shall have special
responsibility for peace and for an equitable
arrangement for ensuring the social and economic
advancement of different sections of the population
of Sikkim and in the discharge of his special
responsibility under this clause, the Governor of
Sikkim shall, subject to such directions as the
President may, from time to time, deem fit to issue,
act in his discretion;
(h) all property and assets (whether within or
outside the territories comprised in the State of
Sikkim) which immediately before the appointed day
were vested in the Government of Sikkim or in any
other authority or in any person for the purposes of
the Government of Sikkim shall, as from the appointed
day, vest in the Government of the State of Sikkim;
(i) the High Court functioning as such
immediately before the appointed day in the
territories comprised in the State of Sikkim shall, on
and from the appointed day, be deemed to be the
High Court for the State of Sikkim;
(j) all courts of civil, criminal and revenue
jurisdiction, all authorities and all officers, judicial,
executive and ministerial, throughout the territory
of the State of Sikkim shall continue on and from the
appointed day to exercise their respective functions
subject to the provisions of this Constitution;
(k) all laws in force immediately before the
appointed day in the territories comprised in the
State of Sikkim or any part thereof shall continue
to be in force therein until amended or repealed by
a competent Legislature or other competent
authority;

257

258

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 371F.)
(l) for the purpose of facilitating the application
of any such law as is referred to in clause (k) in
relation to the administration of the State of Sikkim
and for the purpose of bringing the provisions of
any such law into accord with the provisions of this
Constitution, the President may, within two years
from the appointed day, by order, make such
adaptations and modifications of the law, whether
by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary
or expedient, and thereupon, every such law shall
have effect subject to the adaptations and
modifications so made, and any such adaptation or
modification shall not be questioned in any court of
law;
(m) neither the Supreme Court nor any other court
shall have jurisdiction in respect of any dispute or
other matter arising out of any treaty, agreement,
engagement or other similar instrument relating to
Sikkim which was entered into or executed before
the appointed day and to which the Government of
India or any of its predecessor Governments was a
party, but nothing in this clause shall be construed
to derogate from the provisions of article 143;
(n) the President may, by public notification, extend
with such restrictions or modifications as he
thinks fit to the State of Sikkim any enactment which
is in force in a State in India at the date of the
notification;
(o) if any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of
the foregoing provisions of this article, the President
may, by order 1 , do anything (including any
adaptation or modification of any other article) which
appears to him to be necessary for the purpose of
removing that difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after
the expiry of two years from the appointed day;
1

See the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. XI (C.O. 99).

259

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Arts. 371F—371H.)
(p) all things done and all actions taken in or in
relation to the State of Sikkim or the territories
comprised therein during the period commencing
on the appointed day and ending immediately before
the date on which the Constitution (Thirty-sixth
Amendment) Act, 1975, receives the assent of the
President shall, in so far as they are in conformity
with the provisions of this Constitution as amended
by the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act,
1975, be deemed for all purposes to have been validly
done or taken under this Constitution as so
amended.]
1

[371G. Notwithstanding
Constitution,—

anything

in

this

Special provision
with respect to the
State of Mizoram.

(a) no Act of Parliament in respect of—
(i) religious or social practices of the Mizos,
(ii) Mizo customary law and procedure,
(iii) administration of civil and criminal justice
involving decisions according to Mizo customary
law,
(iv) ownership and transfer of land,
shall apply to the State of Mizoram unless the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Mizoram by a
resolution so decides:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply
to any Central Act in force in the Union territory of
Mizoram immediately before the commencement of
the Constitution (Fifty-third Amendment) Act, 1986;
(b) the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Mizoram shall consist of not less than forty
members.]
2

[371H. Notwithstanding
Constitution,—

anything

in

this

(a) the Governor of Arunachal Pradesh shall have
special responsibility with respect to law and order
1
2

Special provision
with respect to the
State of Arunachal
Pradesh.

Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-third Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).

260

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Arts. 371H—372.)
in the State of Arunachal Pradesh and in the discharge
of his functions in relation thereto, the Governor shall,
after consulting the Council of Ministers, exercise his
individual judgment as to the action to be taken:
Provided that if any question arises whether any
matter is or is not a matter as respects which the
Governor is under this clause required to act in the
exercise of his individual judgment, the decision of
the Governor in his discretion shall be final, and the
validity of anything done by the Governor shall not
be called in question on the ground that he ought or
ought not to have acted in the exercise of his
individual judgment:
Provided further that if the President on receipt
of a report from the Governor or otherwise is satisfied
that it is no longer necessary for the Governor to
have special responsibility with respect to law and
order in the State of Arunachal Pradesh, he may by
order direct that the Governor shall cease to have
such responsibility with effect from such date as may
be specified in the order;
(b) the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Arunachal Pradesh shall consist of not less than
thirty members.]
1

Special provision
with respect to the
State of Goa.

[371-I. Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution, the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa
shall consist of not less than thirty members.]

Continuance in
force of existing
laws and their
adaptation.

372. (1) Notwithstanding the repeal by this
Constitution of the enactments referred to in article 395
but subject to the other provisions of this Constitution, all
the law in force in the territory of India immediately
before the commencement of this Constitution shall
continue in force therein until altered or repealed or
amended by a competent Legislature or other competent
authority.
(2) For the purpose of brining the provisions of any
law in force in the territory of India into accord with the

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

261

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 372.)
provisions of this Constitution, the President may by
order1 make such adaptations and modifications of such
law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be
necessary or expedient, and provide that the law shall, as
from such date as may be specified in the order, have
effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so
made, and any such adaptation or modification shall not
be questioned in any court of law.
(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall be deemed—
(a) to empower the President to make any
adaptation or modification of any law after the
expiration of 2[three years] from the commencement
of this Constitution; or
(b) to prevent any competent Legislature or other
competent authority from repealing or amending any
law adapted or modified by the President under the
said clause.
Explanation I.—The expression “law in force” in this
article shall include a law passed or made by a Legislature
or other competent authority in the territory of India before
the commencement of this Constitution and not previously
repealed, notwithstanding that it or parts of it may not be
then in operation either at all or in particular areas.
Explanation II.—Any law passed or made by a
Legislature or other competent authority in the territory
of India which immediately before the commencement of
this Constitution had extra-territorial effect as well as
effect in the territory of India shall, subject to any such
adaptations and modifications as aforesaid, contiue to
have such extra-territorial effect.
1
See the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950, dated the 26th January, 1950, Gazette of
India, Extraordinary, p. 449, as amended by Notification No. S.R.O. 115, dated the 5th June,
1950, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 51, Notification No. S.R.O. 870,
dated the 4th November, 1950, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 903,
Notification No. S.R.O. 508, dated the 4th April, 1951, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part
II, Section 3, p. 287, Notification No. S.R.O. 1140B, dated 2nd July, 1952, Gazette of India,
Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 616/I; and the Adaptation of the Travancore-Cochin
Land Acquisition Laws Order, 1952, dated the 20th November, 1952, Gazette of India,
Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 923.
2

Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 12, for “two years”.

262

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Arts. 372—373.)
Explanation III.—Nothing in this article shall be
construed as continuing any temporary law in force
beyond the date fixed for its expiration or the date on
which it would have expired if this Constitution had not
come into force.
Explanation IV.—An Ordinance promulgated by the
Governor of a Province under section 88 of the
Government of India Act, 1935, and in force immediately
before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless
withdrawn by the Governor of the corresponding State
earlier, cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks
from the first meeting after such commencement of the
Legislative Assembly of that State functioning under
clause (1) of article 382, and nothing in this article shall
be construed as continuing any such Ordinance in force
beyond the said period.
Power of the
President to
adapt laws.

1

[372A. (1) For the purposes of bringing the provisions
of any law in force in India or in any part thereof,
immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, into accord
with the provisions of this Constitution as amended by
that Act, the President may by order2 made before the
first day of November, 1957, make such adaptations and
modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or
amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and
provide that the law shall, as from such date as may be
specified in the order, have effect subject to the
adaptations and modifications so made, and any such
adaptation or modification shall not be questioned in
any court of law.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall be deemed to prevent
a competent Legislature or other competent authority
from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified
by the President under the said clause.]

Power of President
to make order in
respect of persons
under preventive
detention in certain
cases.
1
2

373. Until provision is made by Parliament under
clause (7) of article 22, or until the expiration of one year
from the commencement of this Constitution, whichever
is earlier, the said article shall have effect as if for any
reference to Parliament in clauses (4) and (7) thereof there

Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 23.
See the Adaptation of Laws Orders of 1956 and 1957.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

263

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 373-374.)
were substituted a reference to the President and for any
reference to any law made by Parliament in those clauses
there were substituted a reference to an order made by
the President.
374. (1) The Judges of the Federal Court holding office
immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise,
become on such commencement the Judges of the
Supreme Court and shall thereupon be entitled to such
salaries and allowances and to such rights in respect
of leave of absence and pension as are provided for
under article 125 in respect of the Judges of the Supreme
Court.
(2) All suits, appeals and proceedings, civil or
criminal, pending in the Federal Court at the
commencement of this Constitution shall stand removed
to the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court shall have
jurisdiction to hear and determine the same, and the
judgments and orders of the Federal Court delivered or
made before the commencement of this Constitution shall
have the same force and effect as if they had been
delivered or made by the Supreme Court.
(3) Nothing in this Constitution shall operate to
invalidate the exercise of jurisdiction by His Majesty in
Council to dispose of appeals and petitions from, or in
respect of, any judgment, decree or order of any court
within the territory of India in so far as the exercise of
such jurisdiction is authorised by law, and any order of
His Majesty in Council made on any such appeal or
petition after the commencement of this Constitution
shall for all purposes have effect as if it were an order
or decree made by the Supreme Court in the exercise of
the jurisdiction conferred on such Court by this
Constitution.
(4) On and from the commencement of this
Constitution the jurisdiction of the authority functioning
as the Privy Council in a State specified in Part B of the

Provisions as to
Judges of the
Federal Court and
proceedings
pending in the
Federal Court or
before His Majesty
in Council.

264

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Arts. 374—376.)
First Schedule to entertain and dispose of appeals and
petitions from or in respect of any judgment, decree or
order of any court within that State shall cease, and all
appeals and other proceedings pending before the said
authority at such commencement shall be transferred to,
and disposed of by, the Supreme Court.
(5) Further provision may be made by Parliament by
law to give effect to the provisions of this article.
Courts, authorities
and officers to
continue to
function subject to
the provisions of
the Constitution.

375. All courts of civil, criminal and revenue
jurisdiction, all authorities and all officers, judicial,
executive and ministerial, throughout the territory of
India, shall continue to exercise their respective functions
subject to the provisions of this Constitution.

Provisions as to
Judges of High
Courts.

376. (1) Notwithstanding anything in clause (2) of
article 217, the Judges of a High Court in any Province
holding office immediately before the commencement of
this Constitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise,
become on such commencement the Judges of the High
Court in the corresponding State, and shall thereupon be
entitled to such salaries and allowances and to such
rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as are
provided for under article 221 in respect of the Judges of
such High Court. 1[Any such Judge shall, notwithstanding
that he is not a citizen of India, be eligible for appointment
as Chief Justice of such High Court, or as Chief Justice or
other Judge of any other High Court.]
(2) The Judges of a High Court in any Indian State
corresponding to any State specified in Part B of the First
Schedule holding office immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they
have elected otherwise, become on such commencement
the Judges of the High Court in the State so specified
and shall, notwithstanding anything in clauses (1) and
(2) of article 217 but subject to the proviso to clause (1)
of that article, continue to hold office until the expiration
of such period as the President may by order determine.

1

Added by the by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 13.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

265

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 376—378.)
(3) In this article, the expression “Judge” does not
include an acting Judge or an additional Judge.
377. The Auditor-General of India holding office
immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution shall, unless he has elected otherwise,
become on such commencement the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India and shall thereupon be entitled
to such salaries and to such rights in respect of leave of
absence and pension as are provided for under
clause (3) of article 148 in respect of the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India and be entitled to continue to
hold office until the expiration of his term of office as
determined under the provisions which were applicable
to him immediately before such commencement.

Provisions as to
Comptroller and
Auditor-General
of India.

378. (1) The members of the Public Service
Commission for the Dominion of India holding office
immediately before the commencement of this
Constitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise,
become on such commencement the members of the
Public Service Commission for the Union and shall,
notwithstanding anything in clauses (1) and (2) of
article 316 but subject to the proviso to clause (2) of that
article, continue to hold office until the expiration of
their term of office as determined under the rules which
were applicable immediately before such commencement
to such members.

Provisions as to
Public Service
Commissions.

(2) The members of a Public Service Commission of a
Province or of a Public Service Commission serving the
needs of a group of Provinces holding office immediately
before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless
they have elected otherwise, become on such
commencement the members of the Public Service
Commission for the corresponding State or the members
of the Joint State Public Service Commission serving the
needs of the corresponding States, as the case may be,
and shall, notwithstanding anything in clauses (1) and
(2) of article 316 but subject to the proviso to clause (2)
of that article, continue to hold office until the expiration
of their term of office as determined under the rules which
were applicable immediately before such commencement
to such members.

266

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special
Provisions.—Art. 378A—392.)
Special provision
as to duration of
Andhra Pradesh
Legislative
Assembly.

1

[378A. Notwithstanding anything contained in article
172, the Legislative Assembly of the State of Andhra
Pradesh as constituted under the provisions of sections
28 and 29 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, shall,
unless sooner dissolved, continue for a period of five
years from the date referred to in the said section 29 and
no longer and the expiration of the said period shall
operate as a dissolution of that Legislative Assembly.]
379.—391. Rep. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment)
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.

Power of the
President to
remove difficulties.

392. (1) The President may, for the purpose of removing
any difficulties, particularly in relation to the transition
from the provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935,
to the provisions of this Constitution, by order direct that
this Constitution shall, during such period as may be
specified in the order, have effect subject to such
adaptations, whether by way of modification, addition or
omission, as he may deem to be necessary or expedient:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the
first meeting of Parliament duly constituted under Chapter
II of Part V.
(2) Every order made under clause (1) shall be laid
before Parliament.
(3) The powers conferred on the President by this
article, by article 324, by clause (3) of article 367 and by
article 391 shall, before the commencement of this
Constitution, be exercisable by the Governor-General of
the Dominion of India.

1

Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 24.

PART XXII
SHORT TITLE, COMMENCEMENT 1[, AUTHORITATIVE TEXT IN HINDI] AND REPEALS
393. This Constitution may be called the Constitution
of India.

Short title.

394. This article and articles 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 60, 324, 366,
367, 379, 380, 388, 391, 392 and 393 shall come into force
at once, and the remaining provisions of this Constitution
shall come into force on the twenty-sixth day of January,
1950, which day is referred to in this Constitution as the
commencement of this Constitution.

Commencement.

2

[394A. (1) The President shall cause to be published
under his authority,—

Authoritative text
in the Hindi
language.

(a) the translation of this Constitution in the Hindi
language, signed by the members of the Constituent
Assembly, with such modifications as may be
necessary to bring it in conformity with the language,
style and terminology adopted in the authoritative
texts of Central Acts in the Hindi language, and
incorporating therein all the amendments of this
Constitution made before such publication; and
(b) the translation in the Hindi language of every
amendment of this Constitution made in the English
language.
(2) The translation of this Constitution and of every
amendment thereof published under clause (1) shall be
construed to have the same meaning as the original
thereof and if any difficulty arises in so construing any
part of such translation, the President shall cause the
same to be revised suitably.
(3) The translation of this Constitution and of every
amendment thereof published under this article shall be
1
2

Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1987, s. 2.
Ins. by s. 3, ibid.

267

268

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

(Part XXII.—Short Title, Commencement, Authoritative
Text in Hindi and Repeals.—Arts. 394A-395.)
deemed to be, for all purposes, the authoritative text
thereof in the Hindi language.]
Repeals.

395. The Indian Independence Act, 1947, and the
Government of India Act, 1935, together with all
enactments amending or supplementing the latter Act,
but not including the Abolition of Privy Council
Jurisdiction Act, 1949, are hereby repealed.

